Permission to make digital or hard c opies of all or part of this work 
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed  for profit or commercial advantage 
and that copies bear this notice a nd the full citation on the first page. 
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. CUBE 2012, 3-5 September, 2012, Pune, India. 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1185-4/12/09…$10.00.
 
 A Hybrid Graph based Framework for Integrating 
Information from RDF and Topic Map: A Proposal
Shiladitya Munshi 
Department of Information 
Technology 
Meghnad Saha Institute of 
Technology 
Kolkata 700150, India, 
WIDiCoReL Research Lab, Golf 
Green, Kolkata: 700095, India 
shiladitya.munshi@yahoo.com  Ayan Chakraborty 
Department of Computer Science 
Techno India College of Technology 
Kolkata 700156, India 
achakraborty.tict@gmail.com Debajyoti Mukhopadhyay 
Department of Information 
Technology 
Maharastra Institute of Technology 
Pune 411038, India, 
WIDiCoReL Research Lab, Golf 
Green, Kolkata: 700095, India 
debajyoti.mukhopadhyay@ 
gmail.com  
ABSTRACT  
This paper presents a proposal of a new hybrid graph based 
framework for integrating information within two semantic web information exchange format RDF and Topic Map. The disagreement on common informa tion meta-model in semantic 
web arena, which is characterized by two mostly used information standards (RDF and Topic Map), is aimed to be hurdled across 
through the development of an integrated platform. On the 
background of limitations of the previously proposed solutions 
which address the issues of interoperability between RDF and Topic Map, we propose a novel hy brid graph based information 
integration platform for semantic web which can efficiently address the concerns of RDF and Topic Map interoperability. The hybrid nature of the proposed gr aph based model is characterized 
by the integration of equivalent semantic relations in a hyper graph - graph data structure framework. Critical theoretical aspects of this model are discussed with respect to the requirements and the methodologies.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors  
H.3.3 [ Information Search and Retrieval ]: Information 
filtering, Retrieval models. 
General Terms  
Algorithms, Languages, Management 
Keywords  
Semantic Web, RDF, Topic Ma p, Meta-model Mapping, Graph 
Theory, Hyper Graph. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
As proposed by Tim Berners-Lee et al [1] semantic web is viewed 
as the web of information for m achines to understand. Instead of 
considering the web as a coll ection of linked human-readable 
data, semantic web or web 3.0 is considered to be a rich collection of machine-comprehensible inform ation [21-26]. Before the days 
of XML, many a problems of data  manipulation have arisen out of the disagreement of common data framework in web 2.0. The same problem has emerged out pres ently for semantic web or web 
3.0, not due to disagreement of  common data framework, rather 
due to disagreement of common information framework. Social in-viabilities of following a single standard information model have been established by simultaneous proposition and usage of many information standards. Resource Description Framework 
(RDF) and Topic Map are the most prominent and widely used candidates among the many differe nt semantic web information 
standards. The accessibility, readability and searchability of web information have been considerably limited due to the co-existence of these two types of information frameworks.   Since last few years, many effort s have been found [2 to 9] which 
address this problem. Many inter-operable translation mechanisms for semantic web in formation models have been 
designed and developed keeping RDF and Topic Map in focus, 
but none of them were able to overcome the intricacies of information exchange among the said two frameworks completely. Current paper investigates this issue from a different perspective where a direct translation mechanism from one format to other and vice-versa is not considered to be a proper solution to the problem of RDF-Topic Map interoperability. A hybrid graph based framework for information integration which is primarily different from the existing transla tion processes, is proposed here 
which would promise completeness and naturalness as well.  On the background of the above discussion, the motivations of the current paper are summarized below. (i) Constantly growing demand of information integration technologies in semantic web (ii) Inabilities of current direct cross framework translation processes to meet all the issues of interoperability of RDF and Topic Map; and  (ii) RDF and Topic Map both have an intuitive graph like representation, which could be exploited further for information integration.   Next follows the formal objectives of the present study (a) To establish the importance of an information integration framework for RDF and Topic Map, which is essentially different from the direct translation mechanisms. (b) To finalize the requirements for the information integration framework. (c) To establish hybrid graph data structure as the basic theoretical background for the information integration framework; and finally 
641
(d) To officially propose and discuss the critical theoretical 
analysis for the hybrid framework.   The detailed structural and semantic analysis of this model is beyond the scope of this proposal. The primary goal of this paper 
is to theoretically establish the justification of the hybrid graph 
based information integration model over any kind of RDF to Topic Map or Topic Map to RDF converter. While specific integration mechanisms have b een identified as the future 
research works, the current paper discusses the theoretical aspects of the requirements and approach  for this hybrid graph based 
information integration framework.   Rest of the paper is organized as described next. Section II discusses basic features of RDF and Topic Map with respect to 
interoperability and mapping issues. While Section III extensively reviews the previous proposals of RDF and Topic Map interoperability, section IV discusses the primary point of differences between direct cross framework translation framework 
and a hybrid framework for integr ating information. Next, section 
V introduces the concepts of a hybrid graph based information integration framework along with theoretical analysis of the requirements, approach and methodologies for the proposed 
model. Conclusion of the study and the bibliography are presented at the end.  
2. OVERVIEW OF RDF AND TOPIC MAP 
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a simple metamodel for defining and exchanging information on the semantic web. It was proposed by  Tim Berners-Lee and currently 
has been evolved as a W3C standard [15]. 
 
2.1 Resource Description Framework (RDF) 
RDF is simple, domain-neutral information metamodel which 
consists of an unordered set of st atements [16]. Each statement is 
a triple that relates a subject and an object through a predicate. 
The subject of each statement is a resource which can be thought of just about any-thing identifiable. Every resource either has a single global URI identifier or is a 'blank' resource with unique identity but no identifier at all and which are identified only by the relationships they enter into. While a predicate describes the relationship between the subject and the object and it is also considered to be a resource and allowed to be blank, the object of each statement is either a res ource or a literal. Literals are 
structured objects, not just strings  and it may have a language tag, 
and can be interpreted either as a simple string or as an XML fragment. A literal cannot be the subject of a statement and cannot be interpreted as a typed value. 
 
There are only two concepts to provide basic typing: Property and Type. Type is a resource used as the predicate when stating the type (class) of another resource. Property is the type of all resources that can be used as predicates and Type is of type Property. RDF Schema (RDFS) ma intains the notion of typing by 
introducing the Class concept. The type of every resource must be an instance of Class (that is, a resource of type Class). Class is itself of type Class, giving RDFS an unstratified type model. RDFS recommends that every resource must be the instance of at least one Class, so it introduces Resource, the class of all resources and the class Literal as  the class of all literals. Apart 
from this, RDF framework introduces the concepts of Collection of members and it is characteri zed by 'Bag', 'Seq' and 'Alt' 
elements. 
2.2 Topic Map 
Topic Map [17], currently presente d as a standard from ISO, has 
its roots in concepts of indexes, glossaries and thesauri and it is 
considered to be a structure for organizing metadata about existing resources. As suggested in [18], central theme of a Topic Map includes Topic, Associations and Occurrence. A Topic refers to the object or node in the topic map that represents the subject being referred to. Subjects are split into addre ssable and non-addressable ones. 
Addressable subjects are reified by specifying a subject address 
for the topic and non-addressable subjects are reified with a subject identifier which is the address of a subject indicator resource that identifies the actual subject. There exists a one-to-one rela tionship between Topics and 
subjects, with every Topic representing a single subject and every subject being represented by ju st one Topic. Topics can be 
categorized according to their type and any given Topic is an instance of zero or more topic types. Topic types in turn are defined as Topics by the standard . All the Topics have three kinds 
of characteristics: names, occurrences, and roles in associations. A Topic may or may not have a name. Multiple base names are allowed to be assigned for particul ar Topic and this leads to the 
concept of scoping.  A Topic may be linked to one or more information resources that 
are considered to be relevant to the Topic in some way. Such resources are called occurrences of the Topic. The occurrences are generally external to the Topic Map document itself and they are identifiable typically with URIs or HyTime addressing. Occurrences may be of any numbe r of different types and such 
distinctions are supported in the standard by the concepts of Occurrence Role and Occurrence Role Type. While the Role is simply a mnemonic; the Type is a reference to a Topic which further characterizes the nature of  the occurrence's relevance to its 
subject.  Topic Associations are used to relate two or more Topics as Topic Map is a hyper-graph structure. An  association has a Type and a 
Role and these two features have great significance in Topic Map modelling. Further Topic Map presents the concepts of Facets and Scopes.   The Topic Maps specification offe rs a framework for specifying 
subject classification and type ge neralization relationships, since 
neither is considered to be a metamodel primitive. Classification employs the type-instance Association Type with the Role Types.  
2.3 Critical Comparisons of RDF and Topic 
Map with respect to Interoperability 
According to [7] RDF and Topic Maps are both identity-based standards and the key concept in both is 'Symbols' representing identifiable 'things', which statem ents can be made about. this 
'thing' is identified as 'Resource' in RDF and as 'Subject' in Topic Map. Hence Resources and Subjects have one to one mapping. Similarly the Topics in Topic Map and Nodes in RDF has very 
close correspondence leaving only one point of difference that while a Topic and a Subject can be  used interchangeably, a Node 
and a Resource cannot.   
642
From the perspective of interoperability, the concern signifies due 
to the different approach of RDF and Topic Map towards few 
fundamental metamodel notions. C ontrast to Topic Map, an N-
array relationship is not s upported by RDF. Though an easy 
formalism is in practice to in troduce new Resources in RDF to 
support Topic Maps' possible N numbe r of association roles, it is 
not a very clean and meaningful way to establish interoperability or to integrate information. The concern intensifies with the fact 
that there exists only one form of assertions in RDF (that is statement), whereas Topic Maps have three different kinds of 
topic characteristics known as names, occurrences, and associations. In spite of the fact that feasible procedures exist in naming a RDF node, qualification of  Topic Map occurrence never 
got its counterpart in RDF.   The issues with Identity make a serious concern about the interoperability. While the Topic Maps deal with concept of 
'Subject Address' and 'Subject Iden tifier' to address the Identity 
issues, RDF provides no solution at all to the problem. Further, the two metamodels, RDF and Topic Map differ in the process of reification too. In RDF, reified statements need special treatment and hence used rarely whereas reified Topics behave as usual. This peculiarity has a moderate significance in interoperability.  A prominent difference exists in th e case of 'Qualification' of the 
two said standards. Topic Maps us e 'Scope' to take care of it but 
other than 'Language' identifier in  'Literals', RDF has never given 
any emphasis on the process of 'Qualification'. Moreover, while dealing with 'Types' and 'Subtypes', Topic Maps follow a stratified model but on the contrary RDF follows a unstratified model.  On the basis of the above discu ssion, it may be concluded that 
RDF and Topic Map, having supe rficial similarities in their 
objectives, implement different concepts for different audience. The two meta-models follow different approach for preserving information; hence the challenge of their interoperability is worth doing an extensive research.  
3. REVIEW OF PROPOSALS ON RDF - 
TOPIC MAP INTEROPERABILITY 
In 2001, Moore started a new ki nd of semantic web research 
directed towards a data migra tion within RDF and Topic Map 
framework and it was considered to be the first step taken towards intended interoperability. Just with the Moore proposal which undertook RDF to TM and TM to RDF translation as well, Stanford proposal was published which concentrated only on TM to RDF translation. The most prominent other proposals to follow were Ogievetsky Proposal (TM to  RDF), Garshol Proposal (RDF 
To TM and TM to RDF both) and Unibo Proposal (RDF To TM and TM to RDF both). A good survey of the existing translation proposal work is already present in [19].  The Moore Proposal [2] described a data translation mechanism through both object level and sema ntic level mapping between the 
said two information meta-models; but the superiority of semantic level mapping over object level ma pping was established. Both 
the mappings are not beyond of the boundaries of confusion and incompleteness because of the fact that many a metamodel constructs like Topic Maps scopes, occurrences, subject types or names were not discu ssed, nor did he discuss the RDF types, containers or reified statemen ts. However, the RDF to TM 
mapping requires changes to the T opic Maps metamodel, and the 
reverse mapping fails to realize the nature of RDF assertions, 
hence this proposal is never implemented. Though the Moore 
Proposal had little academic or technical values, it was the first effort towards metamodel integration. In Stanford proposal, Lacher and Decker [3] focused on a TM to RDF translation only where the inabilities of object level mapping towards data preservation was esta blished. The effect of other 
layers’ mapping, like syntactic a nd semantic mappings, was also 
discussed. Though there exists an example of the integration by 
showing a query that spans Topic Map and RDF information, it is 
quite artificial for proper fit. The user must know the precise boundaries of the lifted topic map, and manually account for the semantic differences in the query. Hence, Lacher and Decker do not achieve true semantic integration of the two meta-models.   The Ogievetsky proposal [4] cons idered both RDF to TM and TM 
2 RDF translation and it scores we ll with respect to completeness 
as it covers more-or-less every aspect of XTM syntax. The proposal is based on best possi ble semantic mapping and hence 
fails in translating Topic Map asso ciation into RDF relation. With 
a semantic mapping lift, however the problem is managed, the 
proposal scores very low in naturalness.   Garshol [5 to 8] next proposed a bi-directional translation model for RDF and Topic Map. In this proposal, the object mapping is completely rejected as a probable solution for interoperability. The pure semantic mapping was also not considered due to its incompleteness. The proposal wa s based on a vocabulary specific 
mapping that governs a semantic  mapping. Garshol proposal 
works well with respect to naturalness but it is clearly not complete. Some issues really exist with vocabulary generation and its housekeeping, generation of reverse mapping on the fly 
and some object mapping details like subject locator.  Unibo proposal [9] is mainly based on a hybrid approach with both Semantic and Object ma pping which follows Garshol 
approach for bi directional translation. This proposal is fairly natural, but along with some inco mpleteness, this has got some 
serious issues with the round trip translation.  Other than the proposal discussed above, the works presented in [10 to 13] also provide momentum  to the cross metamodel data 
translation research, but all the noted research works are never aimed neither to unify the RDF a nd Topic Map, nor to develop an 
upper level model to integrate th e information preserved within 
two models. The model discussed in [14] presents initial works towards integrating the information. The model proposed in the current paper is greatly inspired by the model presented in [14] called as Braque . This conceptual metamodel is not complete 
with respect to functional realization and has greatly motivated the present research to bridge the gap.   
4. INFORMATION INTEGRATION 
VERSUS CROSS MODEL TRANSLATION 
The interoperability of RDF and Topic Map could be approached from two completely different perspectives. One being well known cross model translation [2 to 9], and the other being Information Integration [14]. As described in previous section, 
many proposals have been published which support cross model 
643
translation and comparatively lesser works have been published 
from Information Integration poi nt of view. The metamodel 
Braque  [14], in strict principles, does not deal with RDF and 
Topic maps alone, but it integr ates many meta-models of 
semantic web and at the same time establishes the superiority of this approach.   Each information metamodel in semantic web has been evolved 
focusing different perspective for different set of audience; they 
all have originated inspired by varied set of other models or practices, hence a direct mapping from one metamodel to the other is practically not feasible. Though the difference of syntactical constructs may be  bridged, the one to one 
correspondence of semantic expressiveness between two 
metamodel is never guaranteed. Critical theoretical analysis of RDF and Topic Map [7] has reveal ed the major differences in 
their syntactical, object level and semantic approach. As described in the previous secti on, all the existing cross model 
translation mechanisms have failed to maintain completeness and naturalness simultaneously. While the absence of semantic equivalence between RDF and Topic Map leads to incompleteness, the object level di stances impart non-naturalness. 
As suggested in [14], object semantic lifts are often required to to translate RDF to Topic Map or vice versa and hence demand knowledge of target metamodel ontology. The semantic lift also imparts the non-naturalness in the target metamodel as the same 
feature will have different semantic expressions when semantically lifted. Further, the vocabulary based approach 
suffers from efficiency and reversibility.  On this background, information integration from RDF and Topic 
Map provides a cleaner and feasible way of interoperability. The information integration platform is considered to be placed in semantically upper level than the RDF and Topic Map individually. The integration model actually lets semantically poor metamodel RDF to preserve all the semantic features and 
demands Topic Map semantic featur es to be viewed generic in 
nature. Information integration model promises better knowledge 
creation through generic query system and reversibility is always guaranteed. The RDF integration to the model requires strong semantic beliefs and Topic Ma p integration demands more 
flexibility. So a trade-off is requi red to achieve reasonable amount 
of interoperability. An information integration model is essentially different from the one to one mapping of RDF and 
Topic Map in a sense that unna tural and unreliable semantic 
mappings are avoided and object le vel distortions can effectively 
be managed with generic designing.  The information integration model stands generic to the direct 
metamodel translations. Any of RDF to TM or TM to RDF translation mechanism can (at least) be theoretically possible from the integrated platform. As the literature review suggests that there hardly exist any published work on this direction, incorporating direct metamodel translation into the information integration model would be worth researching. The inabilities of direct mapping of RDF to Topic Map or vice-versa to preserve naturalness and completeness could be covered up by the 
translation through information in tegration model as it is more 
semantically rich and object level tuning liberty is there. Hence the discussion can be concluded with a strong belief that the semantic web vision of providing machine-comprehensible linked 
data could more be supported by an integrated platform which evolves as more generic mode l than one to one mapping of 
information meta-models.  Having justified the importance of an information integration model and its essential difference from the direct metamodel mappings, the next section proposes  a novel architecture of hybrid 
graph based information integra tion model which is actually a 
flexible hyper graph - graph data structure to preserve semantics 
of both RDF and Topic Map.   
5. A HYBRID GRAPH BASED 
FRAMEWORK FOR INFORMATION 
INTEGRATION 
In this section, we propose a hybrid graph based framework for 
Information Integration concen trating on RDF and Topic Maps. 
The proposal is an abstract idea of how the information within 
both the RDF and Topic Map coul d be integrated at knowledge 
level through a hybrid data struct ure of Hyper graph and graph. 
This framework provides a model which recognizes the importance of both object level a nd semantic level mapping for an 
optimal solution. The mapping here involves concepts of RDF, as 
well as Topic Map and the concep ts of the proposed models. The 
mapping is aimed to incorporate a ll the semantically equivalent 
RDF and Topic Map concepts into a common new concept. Where this semantically equivalence is not observed at all, the object level inference could be  drawn from both RDF and Topic 
Map and would be utilized to construct new object level integrity for the proposed model. Hence the objective of the semantic and object level mapping is to inte grate both RDF and Topic Map 
semantics at the knowledge level. The hybrid nature will be manifested by the mapping of semantic correspondence and the 
integration of object level constructs into a hyper graph connected with graph data structure.   The proposed information integr ation model views the problem 
domain rather from a different perspective. In view of the fact that, different information relating to a specific 'thing' may exist in RDF and Topic Map simultaneously, the model under discussion tries to integrate all the information for that specific 'thing' from different RDF and Topic Map sources into an 'integrated framework' so that r unning queries on that 'integrated 
platform' will enable better resu lt with respect to search and 
decision taking. This sets the higher level requirements for the 
proposed model and opens up the avenues for tuning the lower level criteria.  The current study does not discuss any theory on hyper graph or graph due to space constraint, but aims to present an informal discussion on the potential of the proposed model in preserving RDF and Topic Map information. The possibilities of the proposed model to work efficiently  as an information integration 
model depends on early identifi cation of the requirements and 
design approach.   
5.1 Requirement Analysis 
As discussed above, the knowledge level integration of RDF and 
Topic Map to a new platform is identified as the basic requirement. This knowledge level integration is expected to enable better search and decision making facilities when queried. Hence a formal approach for query processing can be considered as another requirement for the proposed model. A graph based 
644
notations of the instances of the proposed integrated framework 
will increase its readability and he nce to be considered according 
to its merit.  Proposed model has to integrate the knowledge hidden in RDF and Topic Map frameworks and hence has to support object 
oriented paradigms. The hybrid model needs to be strongly typed to integrate RDF and Topic Maps. Though Topic Map is not generically strongly typed, but the feature can be incorporated through PSI hence the strongly typed feature will not make the proposed model weak.  Stratification nature of the propos ed model is important to be 
fixed. The unstratified nature of RDF and serializing XML Schema have a strong potential to dictate the nature of the proposed model to be unstratif ied as well, but the ease and 
formalized structural relationship of the stratified nature cannot be 
neglected at the same time. On the background of different related 
arguments, the proposed model is decided to be following 
stratified model architecture. Proposed model needs to impose 
auxiliary semantic constraints to integrate unstratified RDF into itself. The stratification enables the hybrid hyper graph - graph data structure to contain semantica lly rich information at different 
levels of knowledge integration. 
 
5.2 Approach and Methodology Analysis 
The proposed information integration model allows the instances of the framework to be viewed as a hybrid structure composed of a hyper graph connected with multiple directed labelled graph. The literature review suggests that successful efforts have been done [20, 21] in past to export RDF framework, with all its features, to a directed graph structure, and Topic Map has an inherent hyper graph structur e. On this observation, the 
information integration model can be represented by a hybrid of 
hyper graph - graph data structure.  The simple constraint driven 
analysis will translate the hyper graph to the graph structure to represent and preserve the knowledge  of RDF model. The cost for 
alteration of stratification nature and constraint application should 
be analysed in order to address the theoretical background of the proposed model.   
5.2.1 Justifications for Graph based Framework 
The following discussion justifies the candidature of graph based data structure to represent proposed information integration model. Graphs are mathematical objects which enjoy wide-spread usage for many tasks, which include the visualization and analysis of data for humans, mathematical reasoning, and the implementation as a data structur e for developing software. These 
tasks are relevant in the context of RDF Topic Map data integration as well. Graph can be thought of as a concept of human understanding. Though the evol ution of Semantic Web is 
for machine-comprehensible inform ation, the research efforts on 
this, demands human understanding of the models also. Hence 
any graph based data structure is  a natural choice. A strong graph 
theoretical background enables the integration model to exploit graph theory results when the issues of metamodel domain are 
mapped to graphical domain. Th e choice of graph based data 
structure provides an edge to the model to be fit for semantic web applications due to its scalability and path traversal algorithms. 
 
 5.2.2 RDF Integration 
RDF integration to the proposed structure is inspired by the discussion of [20, 21]. The RDF Graphs are classically defined as set of RDF triplets. The graph interpretation of different RDF 
constructs exists. URI referen ce, resources, literals, external 
variables etc. have their own re presentations with graph theory, 
but the representations are never aimed to be fit in a more semantically rich data structure with hyper graph and graph. The 
unstratified graphical representation needs to be mapped to a stratified one so as to be fit seamlessly as that of Topic Map constructs. The proposed generic hyper graph structure can be associated with a RDF to incorporate the n-array relationships. The classical ways of cross model translation mechanisms has failed to address this problem effectively. Proposed model as 
represented as a hyper graph has a liberty to incorporate n-array RDF associations which otherwis e would be decomposed down to 
multiple binary associations. The incidence graph of the hyper graph provides the flexibility to represent multiple binary relations also. The graph connected with hyper graph nodes solves the classical RDF semantic shortfall of indirect URI referencing by other expressions.   
5.2.3 Topic Map Integration 
Topic Map framework inherently  supports a hyper graph hence 
the Topic Map integration would possibly be easy, but the issues related with addressable and non-a ddressable resources have to be 
clearly designated. The extra level of indirection within the same strata would be a natural choice for this. The class ontology and 
type instance of the Topic Map could be integrated in the proposed model through multilevel hyper graph data structure. The different levels of class ont ology and type instance should be 
within a single strata. The scope of Topic Map, which is not present in the RDF concepts, c ould be expressed with multilevel 
node structures within the hype r graph. Occurrences in Topic 
Map could be integrated in th e proposed model as a connected 
graph structures with the nodes of the hyper graph and occurrence roles might be successfully incorporated with edge values in the connected graph. The hybrid nature of the data structure thus gets justified. The hyper graph structure representation of the information integration is based on the justified mapping between RDF/Topic Map concepts and the hybrid gr aph constructs. This mapping is 
essentially different from cro ss metamodel mapping, as here 
individual metamodel gets integr ated to the proposed framework 
which has no semantic limitations in the primitive constructs hence low level mapping invol ving RDF blank nodes, RDF 
names, Topic name etc. should get done. The proposed model does not ch ange the source metamodel 
structure, so the issues with reversibility do not play any role. The hyper graph - graph data structure, due to its scalability, will allow any considerable size of RDF or Topic Map to be integrated seamlessly. Querying within a RDF or Topic Map are mapped to path traversal algorithms while document level querying are mapped to graph matching algorithms. Further the issues related with RDF/Topic Map entailment, minimization, semantic association and clustering would be convoluted to corresponding well known graph theory domain.  Proposed model for integrating information from RDF and Topic 
Map has been conceptualized as stated above. The model construction with specific integration complexities are not presented here. The discussion pr esented establishes that the 
645
concept of hyper graph - graph data structure has enough potential 
for being right candidate for the information integration purpose.  
 
6. FUTURE WORK 
The current proposal has a considerable potential for evolving as 
a computational model of inform ation integration from RDF and 
Topic Map. Proper justification and conceptualization of the integrated model demands follow up study and experimentations. 
The hybrid hyper graph - graph data structure discussed informally, must be formally defined and illustrated. The future research must employ concentration on applying path traversal and graph matching algorithm in or der to processing queries and 
other issues. Bi directional cha nges in stratification within the 
hybrid structure should have mathematical groundings and the incidence graph generation must follow an elegant way with theoretical basis. The semantic  conversion from RDF and Topic 
Map demands an extensive future study. Graph based theoretical background will fall short to integrate the information if the semantic mappings are not carried out in a proper and cleaner way.  The experimental methodologies n eed to be identified and fixed 
for further research to succeed. A detailed planning is necessary to display the effectiveness of the proposed model. The experimentations should be carried  out in multiple stages to A) 
integrate RDF documents B) integrate Topic Map documents C) query on integrated RDF and Topic Map that should produce equivalent result if queried on the individual metamodel and D) 
query on multiple integrated RDF and Topic Maps that should produce better result than the results if queried on individual metamodel separately.   
7. CONCLUSION 
Present paper proposes a hybrid hyper graph - graph based model for information integration from RDF and Topic Map sources. The significance of the integrated framework has been discussed on the background of existing cross metamodel translational processes. Critical analysis of RDF and Topic Map is carried from interoperability perspective and the important proposals for such interoperability are reviewed. On the platform laid thus, integrated framework has been proposed. Hyper graph - graph based hybrid data structures has been presented with some critical analysis which are crucial for further study on this.  
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, Ora Lasilla. 2001. The      
Semantic Web . Scientific American. 
[2] Moore, Graham. 2001.  RDF and Topic Maps: An exercise in 
convergence, Proceedings of XML Europe. 
[3] Lacher, Martin S. Decker, Stefan. 2001. On the Integration 
of Topic Maps and RDF Data , Extreme Markup Languages 
Conference. 
[4] Ogievetsky, Nikita. 2001. XML Topic Maps through RDF 
glasses . Extreme Markup Languages Conference. 
[5] Garshol, Lars Marius. 2001.  Topic maps, RDF, DAML, OIL: 
A comparison . 
[6] Garshol, Lars Marius. 2002.  An RDF Schema for topic maps   
[7] Garshol, Lars Marius. 2003. Living with Topic Maps and 
RDF.  [8] Garshol, Lars Marius. 2003.  The RTM RDF to topic maps 
mapping: Definition and Introduction.  
[9] Ciancarini, Paolo; Gentilucci, Riccardo; Pirruccio, Marco; Presutti, Valentina; Vitali, Fabio. 2003. Metadata on the 
Web: On the integration of RDF and Topic Maps.  
[10] Vlist, Eric van der. 2001. Representing XML Topic Maps as 
RDF.  
[11] Prud'hommeaux, Eric, Moore, Graham. 2002. RDF Topic 
Map Mapping. 
[12] Pepper, Steve; Schwab, Sylvia. 2003. Curing the Web's 
Identity Crisis: Subject Indicators for RDF. 
[13] Vatant, Bernard. 2004. Ontology-driven topic maps . 
[14] Kaminsky, Piotr. 2002. Integrating Information on the 
Semantic Web Using Partially Ordered Multi Hypersets.  
[15] http://www.w3.org/RDF/ 
[16] www.w3.org/TR/rdf-primer/ 
[17] http://www.isotopicmaps.org/ 
[18] http://badame.vse.cz/2005/tao/TheNewTAO.pdf 
[19] www.w3.org/TR/2005/WD-rdftm-survey-20050329/ 
[20] Jonathan Hay
 es. 2004 . A Graph Model for RDF.  Diploma 
Thesis, Technische Universitat Darmstadt, Universidad de Chile 
[21] http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/#intro 
[21] Wu, C., Potdar, V., Chang, E., 2008. Latent Semantic 
Analysis – The Dynamics of Semantic Web Service Discovery. In:  T. Dillon, Chang, E., R. Meersman, K. Sycara eds. 2008. Advances in Web Semantics I. LNCS. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. pp. 346-373. 978-3-540-89783-5.  
[22] Hayati, P. and Potdar, V., 2009. Toward spam 2.0: an evaluation of web 2.0 anti-spam methods. In: 7th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN 2009). Cardiff, Wales, June 23-26.  
[23] H. Binali, V. Potdar, and C. Wu, "A state of the art - opinion mining and its application domains," in Workshop on Web 2.0 and its Applications in conjunction with IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology, 2009 (ICIT 2009), Gippsland, Victoria , Australia, 2009, February 
10-13, pp. 1-6.  
[24] A. K. Singh and V. Potdar, "Blocking online advertising - A state of the art," in Workshop on Web 2.0 and its Applications in conjunction with IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology, 2009 (ICIT 2009), Gippsland, Victoria, Australia , 2009, February 10-13, pp. 1-
10. 
[25] Chai, K. and Potdar, V., 2009. User contribution measurement model for web-ba sed discussion forums. In: 
3rd IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, 2009 (DEST 2009). Istanbul, Turkey, June 1-3.  
[26] Chai, K., Potdar, V., and Chang, E., 2007. A Survey of Revenue Models for Current Ge neration Social Software’s 
Systems. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Science and It s Applications (ICCSA 2007). 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, October 24-26. 
646
