See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/221020571
An Ontology for Modelling Hu man Resou rces Management Based on
Standards
Conf erence Paper  · Sept ember 2007
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-74819-9_66  · Sour ce: DBLP
CITATIONS
29READS
768
3 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
REIMDOC  View pr oject
2nd Iber oameric an Kno wledg e Gr aphs and Semantic Web Conf erence – K GSW C2020  View pr oject
Jaime R amir ez
Univ ersidad P olitécnic a de Madrid
63 PUBLICA TIONS    368 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Boris Mar celo V illaz on T errazas
Fujitsu L td.
79 PUBLICA TIONS    742 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Asuncion Gome z-Perez on 05 June 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
An Ontology for Modelling Human Resources 
Management based on standards 
Asunción Gómez-Pérez1, Jaime Ramírez1 and Boris Villazón-Terrazas1 
 
1 Facultad de Informática, Universidad Po litécnica de Madrid, Ca mpus Montegancedo s/n 
28860, Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain 
{asun, jramirez, bvillazon}@fi.upm.es 
Abstract.  Employment Services (ES) are becoming more and more important 
for Public Administrations where their so cial implications on sustainability, 
workforce mobility and equal opportunities play a fundamental strategic importance for any central or local Government. The EU SEEMP (Single 
European Employment Market-Place) project aims at improving facilitate 
workers mobility in Europe. Ontologies are used to model descriptions of job 
offers and curricula; and for facilitating the process of exchanging job offer data 
and CV data between ES. In this paper we present the methodological approach 
we followed for reusing existing human re sources management standards in the 
SEEMP project, in order to build a common “language” called Reference 
Ontology. 
Keywords: Human Resources Management Standard, Human Resources 
Ontologies. 
1   Introduction 
Nowadays there is an important amount of investment in human capital for economic 
development. Human resources management refers to the effective use of human 
resources in order to enhance organisational performance [8]. The human resources 
management function consists in tracking innumerable data points of each employee, from personal records (data, skills, capabilities) and experiences to payroll records 
[8]. Human resources management has discovered the Web as an effective 
communication channel. Although most busi nesses rely on recruiting channels such 
as newspaper advertisements, online job exchange services, trade fairs, co-worker 
recommendations and human resources advisors, online personnel marketing is 
increasingly used with cost cutting results and efficacy.  
Employment Services are becoming more and more important for Public 
Administrations where their social implications on sustainability, workforce mobility 
and equal opportunities play a fundamental,  strategic importance for any central or 
local Government. The goal of the SEEMP
1 (Single European Employment Market-
Place) project is to design and implemen t an interoperability  architecture for e-
                                                           
1 http://www.seemp.org/ 
2      Asunción Gómez-Pérez1, Jaime Ramírez1 and Boris Villazón-Terrazas1 
Employment services which encompasses cross-governmental business and decisional 
processes, interoperability and reconciliation of local professional profiles and 
taxonomies, semantically enabled web serv ices for distributed knowledge access and 
sharing. The resultant architecture will consist of: a Reference Ontology, the core 
component of the syst em, that acts as a common “language” in the form of a set of 
controlled vocabularies to describe the details of a job posting or a CV (Curriculum Vitae); a set of local ontologies, so that each ES (E-Employment Services) uses its 
own local ontology, which describes the employment market in its own terms; a set of 
mappings between each local ontology and the Reference Ontology; and a set of mappings between the ES schema sources and the local ontologies [4]. 
A major bottleneck towards e-Employme nt applications of Semantic Web 
technology and machine reasoning is the lack of industry-strength ontologies that go 
beyond academic prototypes. The design of such ontologies from scratch in a 
textbook-style ontology engineering proc ess is in many cases unattractive for two 
reasons. First, it would require signifi cant effort. Second, because the resulting 
ontologies could not build on top of exis ting community commitmen t. Since there are 
several human resources management standards, our goal is not to design human resources ontologies from scratch, but to  reuse the most appropriate ones for e-
Employment services developed on the framework of the SEEMP project. In this 
paper we present the methodological approach we followed for reusing existing human resources management standards such as NACE
2, ISCO-88 (COM)2 and 
FOET2, among others. 
This paper is organized as follows: Fi rstly, some related works are briefly 
explained in section 2. Then, section 3 explains the adopted methodological approach 
to build the SEEMP Reference Ontology from standards and already existing 
ontologies. Next, section 4 describes the resultant SEEMP Reference Ontology. Finally, section 5 offers some final conclusions. 
2   Related Work 
Currently the Human Resource Semantic Web a pplications are still in an experimental 
phase, but their potential impact over social, economical and political issues is extremely significant. Bizer et al presents in [2] a scenar io for supporting recruitment 
process with Semantic Web technologies but just within German Government. 
Mochol et al gives in [9] a brief overview of a Semantic Web application scenario in 
the Human Resources sector by way of describing the process of ontology 
development, but its final goal is to merge ontologies. In [3] it is described a 
competency model and a pro cess dedicated to the management of the competencies 
underlying a resource related to e-recruitment (mainly CV or a Job Offer). L. 
Razmerita et al propose in [10] a generic ontology-based user modeling architecture, 
applied in the context of a Knowledge Management System. E. Biesalski et al explains in [1] some dependencies between Human Resources Management and 
Knowledge Management in a concrete scenario.  Finally, there is an effort described 
in [1] whose mission is to promote semantic web technology into HR/e-learning 
                                                          
 
2 Available through RAMON Eurostat's Classifications  Server at http://ec.europa.eu/comm/eurostat/ramon/  
An Ontology for Modelling Human Resources Management based on standards      3 
standards and applications. Its current focus topics includes: semantic interoperability, 
semantic of HR-XML3, etc. 
3 Methodological approach for Reusing Human Resources 
Management Standards  
In this section we describe the adopted approach to build the SEEMP Reference 
Ontology. This methodological approach follows and extends some of the identified 
tasks of the ontology development methodology METHONTOLOGY [5]. This methodological approach consists of: specifying, using competency questions, the 
necessities that the ontology has to satisfy in the new application; selecting the 
standards and existing ontologies that cover most of the identified necessities; semantic enrichment of the chosen standard; and finally evaluating the ontology 
content. The steps of this methodology will be explained briefly below: 
3.1 Specifying, using competency questions , the necessities that the ontology has 
to satisfy in the new application. 
This activity states why the ontology is be ing built, what its intended users are, and 
who the end-users are. For specifying the ontology requirements we used the competency questions techniques proposed in  [6]. These questions and their answers 
are both used to extract the main concepts and their properties, relations and formal 
axioms. We have identified sixty compet ency questions. From  the competency 
questions, we extracted the terminology th at will be formally represented in the 
ontology by means of concepts, attributes and relations. We have identified the terms and the objects in the universe  of discourse (instances). 
3.2 Selecting the standards and existing ontologies that cover most of the 
identified necessities. 
In order to choose the most suitable human resources management standards for 
modeling CVs and job offers, the following aspects have been considered: The degree 
of coverage of the objects identified in the previous task , this aspect has been 
evaluated taking into account the scope and size of the standard. However, a too wide coverage may move us further away the Euro pean reality, therefore we have tried to 
find a tradeoff between this aspect and the following one: the current european needs , 
it is important that standard focuses on the current European reality, because the user partners involved in SEEMP are European, and the outcoming prototype will be 
validated in European scenarios; and the user partners recommendations,  in order to 
asses the quality of the standards, the opinion of the user partners is crucial since they 
have a deep knowledge of the employment market.  
                                                          
 
3 http://www.hr-xml.org 
4      Asunción Gómez-Pérez1, Jaime Ramírez1 and Boris Villazón-Terrazas1 
When specifying job offers and CVs, it is also necessary to refer to general purpose 
international codes such as country codes, currency codes, etc.  For this aim, the 
chosen codes have been the ISO codes, enriched in some cases with user partners classification. 
Finally, the representation of job offers and CVs also require temporal concepts 
such as interval or instant. So, in order to represent these concepts in the final Reference Ontology, the DAML time ontology
4 was chosen.  
3.3 Semantic enrichment of  the chosen standard. 
This activity states how we enrich the human resources management standards, the 
time ontology, the currency classification, the geographic location classification and 
language classification. For that, all the c oncept taxonomies were  verified; then, ad 
hoc relationships among concepts of different taxonomies were established; next, 
concept attributes for describing concept fe atures needed were specified; and finally 
some formal axioms were defined. 
3.4 Evaluating the Ontology content. 
The evaluation activity makes a technical judg ment of the ontology, of its associated 
software environments, and of the docume ntation. We will evaluate the Reference 
Ontology using the competency questions identified in the first task. 
4  SEEMP Reference Ontology 
The Reference Ontology described in this section will act as a common “language” in 
the form of a set of controlled vocabularies to describe the details of a job posting and 
the CV of a job seeker. The Reference Ontology was developed following the process described in detail in section 2 and with the ontology engineering tool WebODE [5]. 
The Reference Ontology is composed of thirteen modular ontologies: Competence, 
Compensation, Driving License, Economic Activity, Education, Geography, Job Offer, Job Seeker, Labour Regulat ory, Language, Occupation, Skill and Time .  Figure 
1 presents: 
• These thirteen modular ontologies (each on tology is represented by a triangle). 
Ten of them were obtained after wrapping the original format of the standard/classification, using ad hoc  translator or wrapper for each 
standard/classification that transformed all the data stored in external resources 
into WebODE’s knowledge model. 
• The connections between the ontologies by means of ad hoc  relationships. These 
relationships are defined between specific concepts inside these ontologies. 
 
                                                          
 
4 http://cs.yale.edu/homes/ dvm/daml/time-page.html  
An Ontology for Modelling Human Resources Management based on standards      5 
Labour
Regulatory
OntologySkill
OntologyLanguage 
OntologyOccupation
Ontology
Geography 
Ontology
Time 
Ontology
Education
Ontology
Driving 
License 
OntologyCompensation
Ontology
Economic
Activity
OntologyJob Offer
OntologyJob Seeker
Ontologyhas work condition / is associated withhas contract type / is associated with
is located in /
has compensation/ 
isassociated with
requires education /is associated withis associated with
has activity sector /is associated withhas nationality from / is nation of
resides in / is residence of
has compensation/has contract type / is associated to
has work condition / is associated to
has location / is associated with
has activity sector /
is associated with
has activity sector / 
is associated withhas job category / 
is associated with
has job category / 
Is associated with
has education / is education ofhas mother tongue / is mother tongue ofspeaks / is spoken by
LE FOREMEURES
ISO 6392CEFISCO-88 COM
ONET
EURES
ISO 3166EURES
DAML Time 
Ontology
FOET
ISCED97
NACE Rev. 1.1EURESISO 4217
Ad hoc wrapper
External Sourcesis associated withhas job category /
is associated to has date of birth
/ is date of birth of
has begin date /
is begin date ofCompetence
Ontology
subClass-OfsubClass-Of
requires competence /
is associated with
has competence / 
is competence ofLabour
Regulatory
OntologySkill
OntologyLanguage 
OntologyOccupation
Ontology
Geography 
Ontology
Time 
Ontology
Education
Ontology
Driving 
License 
OntologyCompensation
Ontology
Economic
Activity
OntologyJob Offer
OntologyJob Seeker
Ontologyhas work condition / is associated withhas contract type / is associated with
is located in /
has compensation/ 
isassociated with
requires education /is associated withis associated with
has activity sector /is associated withhas nationality from / is nation of
resides in / is residence of
has compensation/has contract type / is associated to
has work condition / is associated to
has location / is associated with
has activity sector /
is associated with
has activity sector / 
is associated withhas job category / 
is associated with
has job category / 
Is associated with
has education / is education ofhas mother tongue / is mother tongue ofspeaks / is spoken by
LE FOREMEURES
ISO 6392CEFISCO-88 COM
ONET
EURES
ISO 3166EURES
DAML Time 
Ontology
FOET
ISCED97
NACE Rev. 1.1EURESISO 4217
Ad hoc wrapper
External Sourcesis associated withhas job category /
is associated to has date of birth
/ is date of birth of
has begin date /
is begin date ofCompetence
Ontology
subClass-OfsubClass-Of
requires competence /
is associated with
has competence / 
is competence of
 
Fig. 1.  Main ad-hoc relationships between the modular ontologies. 
4.1 Wrapping human resour ces management standards 
As it was mentioned before, these ontologies  have been developed following existing 
human resources management standards and systems classifications, and they are: 
 
• Compensation Ontology  which is based on the ISO 42175. The ISO 4217 is 
expressed in HTML format. It is a list of 254 currency names and codes.  The 
resultant Compensation Ontology has 2 concepts: Currency  and Salary . For 
every currency element specified in the ISO 4217 a different instance of the 
Currency  concept is defined. So, the Currency  concept has 254 instances. 
An example of instance of the Currency  concept is UNITED STATES - US 
Dollar . 
• Driving License Ontology  which is based on the levels recognized by the European 
Legislation6. This classification is expressed in HTML format and it is a list of 12 
kinds of driving licenses. The resultant Driving License Ontology just has the 
Driving License  concept; and for every kind of driving license specified in 
the European Legislation a different instance of the Driving License  
concept is defined. An example of instance of the Driving License  concept 
is A1 - Light weight motorcycle.  
• Economic Activity Ontology  is based on the NACE Rev. 1.17. This standard is 
expressed in MS Access database form at and it is a classification of 849 
economic activities. The resultant Economic Activity Ontology has 849 concepts. 
                                                           
5 http://www.iso.org/iso/en/prods-ser vices/popstds/currencycodeslist.html 
6 http://ec.europa.eu/transport/home/drivinglicence/ 
7 Available through RAMON Eurostat's Classifications  Server at http://ec.europa.eu/comm/eurostat/ramon/  
6      Asunción Gómez-Pérez1, Jaime Ramírez1 and Boris Villazón-Terrazas1 
In this case we have defined a concept for every element of the NACE taxonomy 
in order to preserve the hierarchy. 
• Occupation Ontology is based on the ISCO-88 (COM)8, ONET9 and European 
Dynamics classification of occupations. ISCO-88 (COM) and ONET are 
expressed in MS Access database forma t; European Dynamics classification of 
occupations is stored in an ORACLE database table. ISCO-88 (COM) is a classification of 520 occupations; ONET is a classification of 1167 occupations 
and the European Dynamics classifica tion has 84 occupations. The resultant 
Occupation Ontology has 609 concepts.  
• Education Ontology,  the education fields are based on the FOET
8 and the 
education levels are based on the ISCED978; both of them are expressed in MS 
Access database format. FOET has 127 education fields and ISCED97 has 7 
education levels. The resultant Education Ontology has 130 concepts. For the 
education levels we have defined the Education Level  concept; and for 
every education level specified in ISCED97 a different instance of the 
Education Level  concept is defined. For the education fields we have 
defined a concept for every element of the FOET taxonomy in order to preserve 
the hierarchy. 
• Geography Ontology  is based on the ISO 316610 country codes and the European 
Dynamics classifications: Continent and Region. The ISO 3166 is expressed in XML format; Continent and Region classifications are stored in ORACLE 
database tables. The ISO 3166 has 244 country codes and names; Region 
classification has 367 regions and Continent classification has 9 continents. The 
resultant Geography Ontology has four concepts, a Location  as main concept, 
which is split into three subclasses: Continent , Region  and Country . 
Labour Regulatory Ontology is based on the LE FOREM
11 classifications 
ContracTypes and WorkRuleTypes, both of them expressed in XML format. 
ContractTypes classification has ten contract types and WorkRuleTypes has 9 work rule types. The resultant Labour Regulatory Ontology has 2 concepts.  For 
every type of work condition or contract type considered by LE FOREM, a 
different instance of one of these two concepts ( Contract Type  or Work 
Condition ) is included in the ontology. An example of instance of the 
Contract Type  concept is Autonomous . An example of instance of the 
Work Condition  concept is Partial time . 
• Language Ontology  is based on the ISO 6392
12 and the Common European 
Framework of Reference (CEF)13. The ISO 6392 is expressed in HTML format 
and CEF is a description in PDF format. The ISO 6392 has 490 language codes and CEF has 6 language levels. The resultant Language Ontology has 3 concepts: 
Language , Language Level  and Language Proficiency . For every 
language element specified in the IS O 6392 a different instance of the 
                                                          
 
8 Available through RAMON Eurostat's Classifications  Server at http://ec.europa.eu/comm/eurostat/ramon/  
9 http://online.onetcenter.org/  
10 http://www.iso.org/iso/en/pr ods-services/iso3166ma/index.html  
11 LE FOREM is an user partner of the SEEMP project, http://www.leforem.be/ 
12 http://www.iso.org/iso/en/prods -services/popstds/languagecodes.html 
13 http://www.cambridgeesol.org/exams/cef.htm 
An Ontology for Modelling Human Resources Management based on standards      7 
Language  concept is defined, so the Language  concept has 490 instances. For 
every language level element specified in  the CEF a different instance of the 
Language Level  concept is defined, so the Language Level  concept has 
6 instances. An example of instance of the Language  concept is eng – 
English . An example of instance of the Language Level  concept is A2 – 
Basic User . 
• Skill Ontology  is based on European Dynamics Skill classification. This 
classification has 291 skills and it is stored in an ORACLE database table. The 
resultant Skill Ontology has 2 concepts: Skill  concept  with its subclass ICT 
Skill . For every skill element specified in the European Dynamic classification 
a different instance of the ICT Skill  concept is defined. An example of 
instance of the ICT Skill  concept is Hardware programming.  
• Competence Ontology  defines a concept called Competence as a superclass of the 
imported concepts Skill , Language Proficiency  and Driving 
License . 
• Time Ontology  is based on DAML ontology14 and it is expressed in OWL format. 
 In order to make possible the enrichment of the standards/classifications, it was 
necessary to import them into the ontology engineering tool WebODE [5]. This 
process consisted in implementing the necessary conversions mechanisms for 
transforming the standards/classifications into WebODE’s knowledge model.  
4.2 Enriching the ontologies 
Once we transformed the standards/classificati ons into ontologies, the next step is to 
enrich them introducing concept attributes and ad hoc  relationships between ontology 
concepts of the same or different taxonomies. We perform this task by doing the following 
• We created from scratch the Job Seeker Ontology and the Job Offer Ontology, 
which models the job seeker and his/her CV information, and the job offer and employer information, respectively. 
• We defined relationships between the concepts of the Job Seeker and Job Offer 
Ontologies and the concepts defined on the standard (classification) based 
ontologies. 
5  Conclusions  
In this paper we have presented the methodological approach we followed for reusing existing human resources management standards in the SEEMP Project. We also 
described the resultant Reference Ontology  which acts as a common “language” in 
the form of a set of controlled vocabularies to describe the details of a job posting and 
                                                          
 
14 http://cs.yale.edu/homes/dvm/daml/time-page.html 
8      Asunción Gómez-Pérez1, Jaime Ramírez1 and Boris Villazón-Terrazas1 
the CV of a job seeker. The Reference Ontology was developed with the proposed 
methodology and with the ontology engineering tool WebODE. 
An important conclusion of the work that we have carried out is that we can reuse 
human resource management standards in new applications following a systematic 
approach. Moreover, it is clear such a reus e can save time during the development of 
the whole system. However, it is not always possible to reuse a standard in a straightforward way, because sometimes the ideal standard does not exist for different 
reasons (different scope, outdated, etc.), and it is necessary to extend some 
“imperfect” standard with additional terminology coming from other standards or ad 
hoc classifications. 
 
Acknowledgments.  This work has been partially supported by the FP6 EU SEEMP 
Project (FP6-027347).  
References 
1. Biesalski, E., Abecker, A.: Human Resource Management with Ontologies. 
Wissensmanagement. LNCS Volume. (2005) 499-507  
2. Bizer, C., Heese  R., Mochol, M., Oldakowski,  R., Tolksdorf,  R., Eckstein,  R.: The 
Impact of Semantic Web Technologies on J ob Recruitment Processes; 7th International 
Conference Wirtschaftsinformatik (2005) 
3. Bourse, M., Leclère, M., Morin, E., Tric het, F.: Human Resource Management and 
Semantic Web Technologies;1s t International Conference on Information Communication 
Technologies: from Theory to Applications (ICTTA), (2004) 
4. FOREM, UniMiB, Cefriel, ARL, SOC, MA R, PEP: User Requi rement Definition 
D.1.SEEMP Deliverable (2006). 
5. Gómez-Pérez A., Fernández-López M, Corc ho O.: Ontological Engineering. Springer 
Verlag. (2003) 
6. Grüninger M, and Fox MS.: Methodology for th e design and evaluation of ontologies In 
Skuce D (ed) IJCAI95 Workshop on Basic Onto logical Issues in Knowledge Sharing, 
(1995) pp 6.1-6.10 
7. Jarrar, M.: Ontology Outreach Advisory  - The Human Resources and Employment 
Domain Chapter. http://www.star lab.vub.ac.be/OOA/OOA-HR/OOA-HR.html 
8. Legge, K.: Human Resource Management: Rh etorics and Realities . Anniversary ed. 
Macmillan. (2005). 
9. Mochol, M., Paslaru, E.: Simperl: Practical Guidelines for Building Semantic 
eRecruitment Applications, Internationa l Conference on Knowledge Management 
(iKnow'06), Special Tr ack: Advanced Semantic  Technologies (2006). 
10. Razmerita, L., Albert A., Angehrn, A.: Ontology-Based User Modeling for Knowledge 
Management Systems. Us er Modeling (2003): 213-217 
View publication statsView publication stats
