American Journal  of Educational Research, 2016 , Vol. 4, No. 7, 570-577 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/ education /4/7/10 
© Science and Education Publishing  
DOI: 10.12691/ education -4-7-10 
Explanatory Sequential Mixed Method Design as the 
Third Research Community of Knowledge Claim  
Dhanapati Subedi* 
Kathmandu University School of Education, Nepal  
*Corresponding author: dpsubedi@kusoed.edu.np  
Abstract   Educational fraternity is moving towards  research based practices to improve educational standards. 
Many novice educational researchers are in dilemma to adopt research design in order to explore reality through 
their research endeavor because of a tag of war on ontological epistemological and axiological perspectives among qualitative and quantitative researchers. In this confounding situation, this article guides them to fuse both qualitative 
and quantitative stand points to explore reality from another perspective which is known as pragmatic paradigm.  In 
this connection, this article aims at explaining the holistic ideas of mixed method design focusing particularly on 
philosophical premises, generating research questions , data collection and analysis process, potential ethical issues, 
quality o f inference and teaching mixed methodology . This article highlights on the growing interest of educational 
researchers on sequential mixed method design  in order to collect and analyze data for legitimize knowledge claim.  
This article is expected to be use ful to novice researchers who are in quandary to adopt explanatory sequential mixed 
method as a research method and it also creates a roadmap in educational research indicating methodological possibilities for new knowledge claim.  
Keywords : Mixed Method De sign, Philosophical Premises, Generating Research Questions, Data Collection and 
Analysis, Ethical Issues, Quality of inference and Teaching Mixed Methodology  
Cite This Article:  Dhanapati Subedi , “Explanatory Sequential Mixed Method Design as the Third Res earch 
Community of Knowledge Claim .” American Journal of Educational Research,  vol. 4, no. 7 (2016): 570-577.  
doi: 10.12691/ education -4-7-10. 
1. Introduction  
The Educational researchers are still in dilemma to 
choose a particular methodological stand poi nt to 
approach a research problem. They often find difficulties 
to choose possible alternative methods to carry out their 
research work. This confusing state has been created 
sometimes because of conflicting situations in para digm. 
In this context, Denzin and Lincoln [4], Geven [6], 
Tashakkori & Teddlie [13,14] , Bryman [20], Ritchie and 
Lewis [21] and Klenke [22]  state that there are three 
communities of researchers in the educational field: qualitative oriented methodologists, quantitative oriented 
methodologists and mixed methodologists. Based on their 
knowledge c laim they are constructivists, positivists and 
pragmatists respectively. The positivist believes that the knowledge is universal and absolute whereas the later 
believe that there may be more than a fixed knowledge 
and it is fallible in the universe by non -positivism thought . 
Based on their knowledge claim, positivists adopted 
quantitative method to state reality in the world whereas 
constructivists espouse qualitative method to construct the 
meaning of the phenomena under investigation. 
Pragmatism on the ot her hand, embraces mixed method as 
the third research community in order to avoid either or 
view of positivism and constructivism.  Here every educationist raises a question: Which 
method is appropriate to claim reality in the educational 
field?  To find the  answer of this question, I read several 
issues in the three communities and found that the answer is still unsolved and left for the future researcher?  This 
gave a new insight into the lane of my mind to further 
inquire some questions in order to create a rguments within 
the existing body of knowledge. Can positivists or construstivists alone explore the entire reality of 
phenomenon under educational vicinity? Cannot we 
combine them into one to claim reality which could be 
more valid and reliable than singl e approach?  These 
questions led me towards mixed method tra dition to 
review its tradition.  
The mixed methods research tradition is less well 
known than QUAN or QUAL traditions because it has emerged as a separate orientation during only the past 20 
years.  Mixed methodologists present an alternative to the 
QUAN and QUAL traditions by advocating the use of whatever methodological tools are required to answer the 
research questions under study. In fact, throughout the 20
th 
century, social and behavioral scient ists frequently 
employed mixed methods in their studies and they 
continue to do so in the 21st century, as described in 
several sources [1,7,13] .  
As Tashakkori & Teddlie [13]  defined mixed m ethod as 
‘a types of research design in which QUAL and QUAN  
approaches are used in types of questions, research methods, data collection and analysis procedures and 
571 American Journal of Educational Research   
inferences’(p. 711). In this regard, it would be worth 
effective to mention Teddlie &Tashak kori [14] as they say 
mixed method research provides better inferences and minimizes unimethod bias. Many researchers select mixed 
method in order to search out the opportunity for a greater 
assortment of divergent views. M any researchers are 
worried to answer the question: What happens if the 
QUAN and the QUAL components lead to two totally 
different conclusions? According to Erzberger and Prein 
(1977 as cited in [14] ), ‘divergent findings a re valuable in 
that they lead to a reexamination of the conceptual frameworks and the assumptions underlying each of the 
two components” (p.35).  
The review of tradition on mixed method above 
underscores the fact that it has been a growing interest educatio nal researcher to avoid methodological bias in 
order to better understand the reality of the phenomenon being investigated. Many mixed methodologists [5,9,14,20,21]  claim  mixed method as the best paradigm 
of research because of a number of reasons. First of all it 
gives a paradigm that philosophically embraces the use of mixed model designs. Secondly, it eschews the use of 
metaphysical concepts that has caused much endless 
discussion and debate. Finally it presents a very practical 
and applied research philosophy. If this design is the best 
for educational research, why are educational researchers 
reluctant to use it widely in their research process? The 
literature above also claims that out of six mixed method 
design, explana tory sequential design is popular among 
educationists. My question is: Why have not they used it 
as a method in their research? Is it because they understand what aspect of it not the how aspect?  In this 
backdrop, Creswell et al [2] say that despite its popularity 
and straightforwardness, this mixed -methods design is not 
easy to implement. Researchers who choose to conduct a mixed method explanatory sequential study have to 
consider certain methodological issues. Such issues 
include the in implementing MM designs. Priority or weight given to the quantitative and qualitative data 
collection and analysis in the study, the sequence of the 
data collection and analysis, and the stage/stages in the research process at which the quan titative and qualitative 
phases are connected and the results are integrated [2,8] . 
Although these issues have been discussed in many books, 
some methodological aspects of this design procedure still 
require clarification. F or example, how researchers decide 
on which method to assign priority in this design, how to 
consider implementation issues, how and when to connect 
the quantitative and qualitative phases during the research 
process, and how to integrate the results of bo th phases of 
the study to answer the research questions.  
The gap above in the existing body of literature on 
mixed method explanatory sequential design led me to 
explore some more practical guidelines in solving those 
issues which could help researchers t o make the right and 
prompt decisions when designing and implementing 
mixed -methods explanatory sequential studies.  
2. Philosophical Premises of Mixed 
Method Design  
Klenke [22] points out that each paradigm makes 
assumption  about the nature of reality or ontology, how knowledge is constructed or epistemology, and assumes 
that the values(axiology) a researcher brings to selection 
of method, participants, data collection, analysis and 
interpretation influence the research process. As we go 
through Tashakkori and Teddlie [14] , Bryman  [20], and 
Ritchie and Lewis [21]  we come to know that 
ontologically, the pragmatist believes that t here is an 
external world independent of our minds. On the other hand pragmatists deny that ‘truth’ can be determined once 
and for all. Pragmatism rejects either -or view on 
constructivism and positivism, rather embraces both 
points of view. It believes tha t researchers may be both 
objective and subjective in epistemological orientation over the course of studying research question.  On the 
axiological ground pragmatists believe that inquiry is 
value free. They believe that values play a large role in 
conduct ing research and drawing conclusions from their 
studies. Regmi [11] writes that pragmatic research is 
driven by anticipated consequences. Pragmatic choices 
about what to research and how to go about it are 
conditioned by wh ere we want to go in the broadest senses.   
3. Generating Research Questions for 
Mixed Method Design  
Once the objectives of a research study are enunciated, 
researchers can drive specific questions and hypotheses. As Tashakkori & Teddlie [14], Bryman  [17,20] , and 
Ritchie and Lewis [21]  state that mixed methods research 
questions are concerned with unknown aspects of a 
phenomenon and are answered with informatio n that is 
presented in both numerical and narrative forms. They 
further clarify that a unique aspect of any given mixed 
method study is that it requires at least two research 
questions (one QUAN, one QUAL). In this respect, 
Creswell [3] also argue that research questions are 
important than methodology in mixed method design.  
This indicates that research questions drive the selection 
of research methods, which are often mixed method in 
nature the complexity of those research q uestions. In this 
context, Bryman [17]  commented on the centrality of the 
research question and said:  
One of the chief manifestations of the pragmatic 
approach to the matter of mixing quantitative and 
qualitative research i s the significance that is 
frequently given to the research question… This position with regard to the debate about quantitative 
and qualitative research prioritizes the research 
question and relegates epistemological and ontological 
debates to the sidelin es. In doing so, it clears the path 
for research that combines qualitative and quantitative research . (p. 118).  
Perhaps the most difficult intellectual exercise that 
individuals undergo in conducting their own research is the generation of researchable questions in a content area 
of interest. The process is even more complicated in 
mixed method research because these researchers typically 
want to integrate the QUAN research questions with 
QUAL research questions. After reviewing many mixed 
research studies,  I found a suitable research questions in 
the work of Teddlie and Stringfield [16] . These researchers  
conducted a longitudinal mixed method study in which they examined school and classroom processes in eight 
 American Journal of Educational Research 572 
matched pairs of differentially effective elementary schools . 
Following were some of the research hypotheses for their 
study:  
Research Hypothesis 1:  Classrooms in more effective 
schools will have higher time - on-task than will classroom 
in less effective schools.  
Resear ch Hypothesis 2:  Classrooms in more effective 
schools will have better discipline than classrooms in less 
effective schools.  
Research Hypothesis 3:  Classrooms in more effective 
schools will have a friendlier ambience than classrooms in 
less effective schoo ls. 
They tested these hypotheses using QUAN data 
gathered in the classrooms by trained observers. These 
results were interesting to the researchers but they were equally interested in how the relationship between 
effective schooling and teaching occurred. Consequently, 
they set out to study the relationship between school and 
teacher effectiveness processes using the following QUAL 
research questions:  
Research Question 1: How are teachers selected at 
more effective schools as opposed to less effective schoo ls? 
Research Question 2:  How are teachers socialized at 
more effective schools as opposed to less effective schools?  
Research Question 3: What are the differences in 
school - level academic leadership in more effective 
schools as opposed to less effective s chools?  
Research Question 4: What are the differences in 
school - level faculty cohesiveness in more effective 
schools as opposed to less effective schools?  
The discussion above draws attention to some of the 
attributes of mixed method research questions. A  
relatively unexplored issue remains to be investigated: 
How should we frame research questions in a mixed 
method study?  Two general approaches are found in the 
current literature: 1) a single question that is overarching in nature and incorporates both the QUAN and QUAL sub 
questions or 2) separate QUAN and QUAL questions, followed by a question regarding the nature of integration 
[18].  The first approach entails first proposing an 
overarching mixed research question and t hen expanding 
it into separate QUAN and QUAL sub questions. We 
believe that in most mixed method studies an overarching 
question is necessary for justifying the choice of a mixed 
method design for the study and paving the way for 
alignment of the purpose a nd question. For example, a 
researcher might ask the following questions: What are the effects of intervention package X on the behavior and 
learning of groups A and B?  Anyone can easily 
understand why this question necessitates an mixed method design. Suc h a question might be followed by 
three sub questions: Are groups A and B different on variables Y and Z? What are the perceptions and 
constructions of participants in groups A and B regarding intervention package X? Why does intervention package 
X work di fferently in the two groups? The sub questions 
are answered in separate strands of the study.  
The second approach according to Creswell and Plano 
Clark [18] includes separate QUAN and QUAL questions 
followed by an explicit question about the nature of 
integration. For example, an  investigator might ask:  “Do 
the quantitative results and the qualitative findings 
converge?” or  “How do follow up qualitative findings 
help explain the initial quantitative results?” (p. 107)  
Data C ollection and Analysis in Various Mixed Method 
Designs  
As we go through Creswell [3], we come to know six 
types of mixed method design. They are: the convergen t 
parallel design, the explanatory sequential design,  the 
explor atory sequential design , the embedded design , the 
transformative design  and the mul tiphase design.  
Creswell [3] says that the researcher in the convergent 
parallel design, gathers both quantitative and qualitative 
data, anal yzes both datasets separately, compares the 
results from the analysis of both datasets, and makes interpretation as to whether the results support or 
contradict each other. The direct comparison of the two datasets by the researcher provides a convergence of data 
sources.  
 
Convergent Parallel Design  
An explanatory sequential design according to Plano 
Clark (2011) consists of first collecting quantitative data 
and then collecting qualitative data to help explain or 
elaborate on the quantitative results. T he rational for this approach is that the quantitative data and results provide a general picture of the research problem; more analysis, 
specifically through qualitative data collection is needed 
to refine, extend or explain the general picture.  
573 American Journal of Educational Research   
 
Explan atory Sequential Design  
In exploratory sequential design, according to Creswell 
and Plano Clark (2011) explain that  the researcher first 
collects qualitative data and then quantitative data. The 
purpose of an exploratory sequential mixed methods design in volves the procedure of first gathering qualitative 
data to explore a phenomenon and then collecting 
quantitative data to explain relationships found in the 
qualitative data.  
 
Exploratory Sequential Design 
The purpose of embedded design, as Creswell and  
Plano Clark (2011)  state; is to collect quantitative and 
qualitative data simultaneously or sequentially, but to have 
one form of data play a supportive role to the other form of data. The reason for collecting the second form of data 
is that it arguments  or supports the primary form of data. 
The supportive data may either qualitative or quantitative.  
 
Embedded Design  
The intent of the transformative mixed methods design, 
as Creswell and Plano Clark (2011) state; is to use one of 
the four designs (conve rgent, explanatory, exploratory or 
embedded), but to encase the design within a 
transformative framework. This framework provides an 
orientating lens for the mixed method design. it informs the overall purpose of the study, the research questions, 
the data  collection and the outcome of the study. The 
intent of the framework is to address a social issue for a 
marginalized or underrepresented population and engage 
in research that brings about change.  
 
Transformative Design  
 American Journal of Educational Research 574 
Like the transformative design, the multiphase design is 
a complex design that builds on the basic convergent, 
explanatory, exploratory and embedded designs. 
Multiphase mixed methods designs occur when researchers or a team of researchers examine a problem or topic through a series of ph ases or separate studies 
(Creswell and Plano Clark (2011).  
 
Multiphase Design  (Source: Creswell ( [3], p. 541) ) 
Out of six mixed method designs explained above, the 
explanatory sequential design is highly popular among 
researchers. In this design, according to Plano Clark (2011) 
consists of first collecting quantitative data and then 
collecting qualitative data to help explain or elaborate on 
the quantitative results.  The rational for this approach is 
that the quantitative  data and results provide a general 
picture of the research problem; more analysis, 
specifically through qualitative data collection is needed 
to refine, extend or explain the general picture. As 
discussed earlier, this design consists of two distinct phases: quantitative followed by qualitative [2]. In this 
design, a researcher first collects and analyzes the 
quantitative (numeric) data.  The qualitative (text) data are 
collected and analyzed second in the sequence and help explain or elaborate on the quantitative results obtained in 
the first phase. The second, qualitative phase builds on the first, quantitative phase, and the two phases are connected in the intermediate state in the study. The rationale for this 
approach is that the quantitative data and their qualitative 
data and their analysis refine and explain those statistical 
results by exploring participants view in more depth.  The 
ideas expressed above by Creswell [2] may not be explici t 
to the novice researchers in the field of education. Then 
the question is: How can the process of explanatory 
sequential design be more pragmatic to the novice 
researchers? The literature above is silent on procedure 
and product under each phase of the e xplanatory 
sequential design.  After reviewing possible books and 
articles on explanatory sequential designed, I came to the 
following process in order to make holistic process of it 
more realistic. The holistic idea can be shown in the 
following tabulated form.  
 
575 American Journal of Educational Research   
4. Process for Selecting an Appropriate 
Mixed Methods Design  
As we discussed earlier, there are six mixed method 
designs and they require certain strategies in order to 
claim new knowledge. Typology of mixed method design 
causes difficulties to t he novice researchers to choose the 
best one which addresses their research problems. This 
leads to a research for literature which can solve the 
problem of selecting an appropriate mixed method design 
out of many for the research endeavor. This has been a  
hurdle for novice educational researchers to choose mixed 
method in their research as a methodology. This has also 
been a main cause of choosing either quantitative method or qualitative method by the novice educational research 
in their research. To solv e this problem many mixed 
method researchers (like [1,5,7,9,14,20,21] ) have created a 
large body of literature on their works. After reviewing their works, I found Tashakkori & Teddlie [14]  
appropriate to explain the steps in selecting an mixed 
method design that best fits the requirements of the investigator’s research questions. According to them the 
following steps take the researcher from the determination 
of the appropriateness of a mixed  method design to the 
selection / development of the best mixed method research 
design for a study.  
1. The novice researchers must first determine if their research questions require a mono method 
or mixed method design.  
Here, Tashakkori & Teddlie [14]  want to make it 
clear to the novice researchers that step 1 decision is made primarily on the nature of the 
research questions and whether both QUAL and 
QUAN data are required to answer those 
questions. If all of the research questions can be 
answered by either QUAN data or QUAL data 
then a mono method design is more appropriate.  
2. The novice researchers should be aware that a number of typologies of mixed method research design exist, and you should know how to access 
details  regarding them. Here they mean, the 
novice researchers have to gather a lot of 
information on typologies of mixed method 
research design  
3. Select the best available mixed method research design for your study, but you realize that you 
may have to eventually generate your own. Here 
they mean researchers’ job is to recognize all the 
possible typologies of mixed method research design but they are free to choose the most 
appropriate or single best available research 
design rather than the perfect fit.  
4. The novice researchers need to be aware of the 
criteria emphasized by each of the mixed method 
design typology and of their implications for 
their study. To make this step explicit, I want to 
quote Creswell et.al [19]  as the y used four 
criteria: implementation, priority, stage of 
integration and theoretical or ideological 
perspective. These criteria identify the important 
components of the typology.  5. The novice researchers should list the general 
criteria before they select  the specific criteria that 
are most important to their study. Here they mean to say that there are general criteria in each typology based on implementation, priority, stage 
of integration and theoretical or ideological 
perspective. The researchers should  make their 
mind up on them before they go for any specific 
criteria.  
6. Apply the selected criteria to potential designs, 
ultimately selecting the best research design for 
your study. Here they mean to say that any 
research must determine which research d esign is 
most in accordance with the desired qualities on the selected criteria. For example, if you believe 
that QUAL research will play the dominant role 
in your study, then you should select a design 
that emphasizes it. If theoretical or ideological 
perspective is important then you may use 
transformative designs.  
7. In some cases, you may have to develop a new mixed method design, using flexibility and 
creativity, because no one best design exists for 
your research project, either when it starts or as i t 
evolves.  
5. Potential Ethical Issues in Mixed 
Methods Research  
Since mixed methods research combines quantitative 
and qualitative research, ethical considerations need to 
attend to typical ethical issues that surface in both forms 
of inquiry. Quantitativ e issues relate to obtaining 
permissions, protecting anonymity of respondents, not disrupting sites and communicating the purposes for the 
study, avoiding deceptive practices, respecting vulnerable 
populations, being aware of potential power issues in data  
collection, respecting indigenous cultures, not disclosing 
sensitive information, and masking the identities of 
participants. Creswell [3] has mentioned the following 
ethical issues in mixed methods designs. They are:  
• In a convergent design, the quantitative and 
qualitative sample sizes may be different. Care 
needs to be taken to not minimize the importance 
of a sample because of its size.  
• In an explanatory design, researchers may use a 
large quantitative database for th e initial phase of 
the research. In order to follow up on these 
individuals with qualitative interviews, there 
needs to be an identifier linked to the quantitative 
database. Some individuals may not want their 
quantitative data released. Using names withou t 
permission constitutes an ethical mixed methods issue  
• In an embedded design, conducting initial 
qualitative interviews to build an intervention 
before an experiment may be helpful in designing 
the intervention. However, using the initial 
interview data  to place to place participants into a 
control group where they do not receive a beneficial treatment presents an ethical issue.  
 American Journal of Educational Research 576 
6. Quality of Inference  
Mixed methodologists prefer to use quality inference to 
avoid either or perspectives of quantitative and qualitative 
research for addressing trustworthiness or reliability and 
validity issues.  
Tashakkori and Teddlie [14]  have proposed the 
strategies for reducing and / or dealing with possible 
threats to inference quality. A ccording to them random 
assignment to groups, matching, homogeneous grouping, 
comparing individuals with themselves, statistical control 
and double blind procedures are strategies for reducing 
and / or dealing with possible threats to inference quality 
in quantitative part.  
Trustworthiness is a global qualitative concept 
introduced by Lincoln and Guba (1985). They have introduced four criteria (Credibility, transferability, 
dependability and conformability) that collectively could 
be combined to determine t he trustworthiness of an 
inquiry. Different methods such as prolonged engagement, 
persistent observation, use of triangulation techniques, 
peer debriefing, negative case analysis, referential 
adequacy, member checks, thick description, 
dependability audit,  conformability audit and reflective 
journal for determining the trustworthiness are strategies 
for reducing and / or dealing with possible threats to inference quality in qualitative part.  
7. Teaching of Mixed Methodology  
Many research teachers around t he world have been 
developing syllabuses for teaching mixed methodology and sharing their best practices assuming common 
concerns for research teachers. In this perspective, many 
educational research teachers are raising a number of 
questions? What could be the ideal syllabus to teach 
mixed methodology? How can we develop an effective 
syllabus for teaching mixed methodology? What types of 
competencies are needed in a mixed method course?  In 
this regards, Tashakkori and Teddlie [14]  advocate 
Natalya Ivankova’s syllabus as an excellent answer. The 
syllabus comprises required competencies in the form of 
12 expected course outcomes:  
1. Understand the philosophical assumptions 
underlying the use of mixed methods research.  
2. Artic ulate the key characteristics of a mixed 
method research study.  
3. Use appropriate search terms for locating mixed 
methods research studies using computerized 
databases.  
4. Understand and explain the rationale for using a 
mixed methods research approach in  a study.  
5. Understand and explain the major types of mixed methods research designs; their strengths and 
weaknesses.  
6. Develop a purpose statement and research 
questions for a mixed methods research study.  
7. Summarize types of data that are often collected in mixed methods research and be able to distinguish between qualitative and quantitative.  
8. Summarize the data analysis strategies within 
mixed method research design.  9. integrate or mix quantitative and qualitative data 
within mixed methods resear ch design  
10. Report and evaluate mixed methods research studies  
11. Draw a visual model of mixed methods 
procedures used in the study 
12. Apply the steps in designing a mixed methods 
research study and develop a mixed methods 
study proposal.  
8. Conclusio n 
This paper highlighted the critical debate on choice of 
paradigm in educational research in order to claim new 
knowledge exploring signature literature on explanatory 
sequential mixed method design as the third research 
community of knowledge claim. The roadmap of a 
research is created on the basis of researchers’ orientation 
on his philosophical premises like his/her ontological 
epistemological and axiological positions for his or her 
research endeavor. In this process, novice researchers who 
are in dile mma to adopt mixed method design because of 
the fear of divergent findings get better insight from this 
article. This article guides them through philosophical 
premises generating research question, data collection and 
analysis process, potential ethical i ssues, quality of 
inference and teaching mixed methodology.  After 
reviewing several books and journals in mixed method 
design, I came to this point of understanding that there has 
been a growing interest of educational researchers for 
philosophical, metaph ical and practical reasons to adopt 
pragmatism to avoid methodological bias in order to better 
understand the reality of the phenomenon being 
investigated. Philosophically, pragmatists reject either or 
view on constructivism and positivism rather embraces 
both points of view. Epistemologically, pragmatism 
embraces both objective and subjective perspectives in 
order to answer research questions with value free inquiry. Mixed method research focused on two general 
approaches for generating research questions that is either 
single question which incorporate both QUAN and QUAL sub questions or separate QUAN and QUAL questions. 
There are six possible designs under mixed method to 
collect data. Out of these the explanatory sequential 
design is highly popular among  researchers. In this design 
a researcher first collect quantitative data followed by 
qualitative and integrate both data in order to come to the 
conclusion.  Mixed methodologists prefer to use quality 
inference to avoid either or perspectives of quantitati ve 
and qualitative research for addressing trustworthiness or 
reliability and validity issues. While adopting syllabus for 
teaching mixed method methodology if we adopt Natalya 
Ivankova’s syllabus as advocated by Tashakkori and 
Teddlie  [14] then we can properly track our students 
towards right direction in mixed method design.  
References  
[1] Brewer,J and Hunter, A (2006). Foundations of multimethod 
research: synthesizing styles (2nd ed.) Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
[2] Creswell, J. W.  (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative 
and mixed methods approaches.  London: Sage Publications . 
577 American Journal of Educational Research   
[3] Creswell, J.W. (2011). Educational research.  New Delhi : PHI 
Learning Private Limited . 
[4] Denzin, N. K., and  Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). Qualitative researc h . 
New Delhi: Sage Publication  
[5] Flick, U. ( 2006).  An introduction to qualitative research . London: 
SAGE Publication . 
[6] Geven, L. M. (2008). The Sage encyclopedia of qualitative 
research methods.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
[7] Maxwell, J. and Loomis, D (2003). Mixed method design: An alternative approach. In A. Tashakkori and C. Teddle (Eds.), 
Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research  (pp. 
241-272). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage . 
[8] Morgan, D. (1998). Practical strategies for combining qualitative and quan titative methods: Applications to health research. 
Qualitative Health Research, 8 , 362 -376. 
[9] Niglas, K.(2004). The combined use of qualitative and quantitative 
methods in educational research . An unpublished doctoral 
dissertation submitted to Tallinn Pedago gical University, Estonia . 
[10] Opie, C. (2004). Doing educational research.  New Delhi: Vistaar 
Publications.  
[11] Regmi, K (2010). Validating non formal and informal learning prospects for lifelong learning and continuing education in Nepal . 
An unpublished MPhil di ssertation submitted to the School of 
Education, Kathmandu University.  
[12] Richards, K. (2003). Qualitative inquiry in TESOL.  NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan.  [13] Teddlie and Tashakkari (2003). Issues and dilemmas in teaching 
research methods course in social and behavior sciences: U.S. 
perspective. International Journal of Social Research 
Methodology, 6  61-77. 
[14] Teddlie and Tashakkari (2009). Foundations of mixed methods 
research: Integrating qualitative and quantitative approaches in social and behavioral sciences . Californ ia: Sage publication . 
[15] Wills, J. W. (2007). World views, paradigms and the practice of 
social science research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
[16] Teddlie, C and Stringfield, S (1993). Schools make a difference: 
lessons learned from 10 - year study of school effects. New York: 
Teachers College Press.  
[17] Bryman, A. (2006). Integrating quantitative and qualitative 
research: How is it done? Qualitative Research, 6 (1), 97 -113. 
[18] Creswell, J.W, and Plano Clark, V. (2007). Designing and 
conducting mixed methods research . Thousan d Oaks, CA : Sage.  
[19] Creswell, J.W, Plano Clark, V., Gutmann, M., and Hanson, W (2003). Advanced mixed methods research designs.  In A. 
Tashakkori and C Teddle (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in 
social and behavioral research (pp. 209 -240). Thousand Oaks, 
CA : Sage.  
[20] Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods . New York: Oxford 
University Press.  
[21] Ritchie, J. and Lewis, J. (2013). Qualitative research practice: A guide for social science students and researcher. New Delhi: Sage.  
[22] Klenke, K. (2016). Qualitative r esearch in the study of leadership . 
Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing Limited . 
 
