See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/221648044
Just for Me: T opic Maps and Ontologies
Conf erence Paper    in  Lecture Not es in Comput er Scienc e · Oct ober 2005
DOI: 10.1007/11676904_13  · Sour ce: DBLP
CITATIONS
13READS
188
2 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
OpenSherlock  View pr oject
Jack P ark
TopicQuests F oundation
30 PUBLICA TIONS    237 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Jack P ark on 28 May 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
Just For Me: T opic Map s and Ontologies  
Jack Park 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, California 94 025 
jack.park@ sri.com Adam Cheyer 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, California 94 025 
adam.cheyer@sri.com 
 
ABST RACT 
The development of the IRIS semantic deskto p platform 
has provided illum ination of  som e im portant issues 
associated with  the co llection and m anipulation  of 
knowledge assets that are organ ized b y an onto logy. We 
explore those is sues related to the personalization of the 
workspace and of the knowled ge assets m anipulat ed b y 
IRIS users. We  show that a topic map can provide a 
neces sary mediation b etween  the form al o rganiz ation 
provided b y an ontolog y to serve th e needs o f semantic  
interop erability between  workst ations and the individual’s  
need to personalize the works pace in a just for me fashion. 
 
Keywords 
Topic map, ontolog y, se mantic de sktop, se mantic 
interop erability , knowledge  assets, personalizatio n 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Experience of life has taugh t me that th e only thin g 
that is  really d esirable wit hout a reason for being  so is 
to render ideas a nd things reason able. 
               –C.S. Pe irce, Science 20 April 1900 
 
Semantic deskt op applic ations  [1]  exist to facil itate 
productivity  and creativity  in k nowledge work. Two key  
use cas es facilitated by such applications  are finding  and 
reminding . Both finding and reminding services derive 
from means b y which information resources are organized  
and turned into knowledge assets. Ontologies are created to  
provide organizational guid ance for local and for  
networked kno wledge work. A new semantic desktop  
system called I RIS1 [14]  we are building at SRI has  
provided an opp ortunity  to obser ve the onset and  evolution  
of an interesting  hum an com puter inter action (HCI) issue. 
In this paper , we wish to shar e an inter esting find ing, a kind  
of tension  that grows out of tw o distinct r equirements for  
tools app lied to knowledge work . Those requ irements call  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1IRIS: http://www. ai.sri.com/software/IRIS for se mantic inte roperability  betwe en knowle dge 
appli cations, and  for us er pers onalization of  the w orkspace, 
something we label “ just for me” . IRIS  can be cas t as a 
kind of topic map for persona l knowledge assets, assets 
which m ust exis t in a  network ed com munity. It is in th at 
topic maps context th at we f ind an opportun ity to realize a 
candid ate solutio n to this HCI issue.  
 
To anti cipate, the term  “just for m e” refers to the notion  
that an individu al’s workstation  must satisf y the user’s need 
to work in a familiar  environmen t, describ ing (naming and  
relating) things  in  way s which are fam iliar to the 
individua l, pos sibly less fa miliar to the networked  
community. This tension  arise s from  the n ature of a 
continuum which separates two concerns. On o ne end of 
that con tinuum lie repr esenta tions of the objectiv e universe 
defined  by a con sensus and empi rical onto logy, while  at the 
other end lies representations of the s ubjec tive u nivers e of 
individual users. The con cerns  are those of  semantic 
interop erability and of usab ility. If the pol es of tha t 
continuum are o rthogonal, they  are more so for some users 
than others . The  clos er a us er is to the obj ective end, as  the 
author of th e ontolog y at the ob jective end would be, the 
lower the t ension; just for me  might not be an issue at all 
some  users.  
 
With this pap er, we hope to op en a discussion that centers 
on HCI, particular ly in th e context of knowledge 
workstations such as IRIS. During the ongoing  
development of the IRIS platfor m, we continue to bump up  
agains t a kind  of barrier, o ne as sociated with us er 
experiences with  IRIS. Th e bar rier we en counter is a simple 
one: users bring  a lifetime of personally  learn ed ontology, 
an instrument of knowledge organization , to th eir day -to-
day activities with IRIS, while IRIS brings a differ ent 
ontolog y, on e created with th e specific int ent to faci litate 
semantic int eroperabi lity across a network, to the ver y 
same activities. As we shall show, the personal ontolog y of 
the user  is oft en not suff iciently sim ilar to the IR IS-
supplied ontolo gy; cognitive dissonance and u nsatisf ying 
user expe rience ensues.  
 
We will argu e that th e presen ce of a personal topic map  
can s erve as a m ediator be twee n the needs  of a  satisfying 
user experi ence with thos e of semantic int eroper ability. We 
suspect that HCI will eventua lly rise to be at le ast as  
important to the success of semantic desktops as is 
semantic interop erability  among platforms. We b elieve that 
it is the spe cific relationships that topic maps forg e between 
subject iden tity and names for things  which f acilitate the 
mediation  process. Let us l ook closer at the issue. 
 
2. DISCUSSION 
The end goal o f all of this  research, design , testing 
and rumination is not just a software system th at is 
easy for people t o get. ( If that were the case, le t's just 
give peop le 1s and 0s, it doesn't get much simpler or 
more generic than that.)  The  end goal is a  data 
structure that sits firmly upon  the deep-seed ed, some 
might say, hard-wired, nat ural structures of the 
human  information arch itecture. The stuff of 
linguistics and g rammar. 
  –Mimi Yin [12]  
Clarifying th e lens is more primordial than any 
particular p erceiving or a cting    
                       –Mark Szpakowski2
 In order to frame a disc ussion about the tension we 
observe to exis t between a us er's needs  and  thos e of 
semantic in terop erability, let us imagine thr ee conceptu al 
spaces, one whi ch is associated  with all the in form ation 
resources dir ectly  or indir ectly avai lable to a user, one  
which is  associated with a model  of those inform ation  
resources, ren dering an o therwise h eterogeneous 
inform ation space into  an organized , clas sified bod y of 
inform ation, and the last spa ce, which is the use r’s lens or 
view into the o ther two s paces. We sketch th ose three  
spaces in Figure 13. 
 
We have  given  those spaces the labels 
 
• Docum ents—the space of all info rmation 
resources 
• Knowledge Stru ctures—structur ed 
represent ations  of the inform ation resourc es 
• Topic Maps—a user’s lens into the other two 
spaces 
 
The i llustra tion does, ind eed, have som e of its a ncestr y in 
those m arvelous illustrat ions in Steve Pepper’s “ The TAO 
of Topic Maps” [6] . But, Figur e 1 is different in the sense 
that it injects an onto logy layer between  inform ation 
resources  and  the topi c map. Such a separation, b y no 
means, im plies that the topic  map does not point into those 
information res ources. Rather , it suggests that there is a 
marriage of ontologies and top ic maps as sug gested in 
Bernard Vatant’ s paper “Ontolog y-driven Topic Maps” [7] . 
Such a m arriage cont rasts with  the case wh ere the topic  
map is the onto logy, as describ ed by Eric Freese in Ch apter 
13 in [2]  and by H. Holger  Rath  in Chapt er 14 [2]. 
                                                 
normal universe of discourse. F or the rest of u s, for th e 2 Mark Sz pakowski: 
http://collab .blueoxe n.net/forums/y ak/2005-
08/msg00040.html#nid07 
3 This diagr am was first con ceived during discussions by  
the firs t author with M ary Keel er and Howard Liu. In  
some sense, it r epresents an interpret ation o f a Peircian 
view of inquir y space. 
 Figure 1:  Conceptual Spac es for In form ation 
Architec ture 
 
The s paces just sketched  relate to the  issues we develop  
here in the fo llowing s ense. The re exist the dual needs  of 
user personalization  of th e works pace, and semantic 
interoperability  between  the  datab ases m aintain ed b y 
individual installations wh en ap plied in group  settings .  In 
some  sense, the user interface , labeled a Topic Map in the 
illustra tion, can  present the universe of inform ation  
resources  available to  the user in a just for me  fashion. The 
desktop application needs to  present those information 
resources  to ext ernal appl ications  in a consensus reality , we 
say, sem antically interope rable fashion. In b oth cases,  
subject  iden tity must remain bas ed on consensus reality .  
2.1 Just for me 
Just for me  is perhaps  best view ed as a fra ctal concept , one 
that starts at the ind ividua l level. Owing to the many 
relationships between indivi duals and their work groups, 
“just for me” mo rphs into “just for us” (locally ), which th en 
morphs (onion skin fashion) to “just for us” (globally ). The 
Topic Maps layer of Figur e 1 delin eates th e context for  
what follows . It is precis ely the topic m ap, perhaps , the 
entire user exper ience associated with int eracting  with IRIS  
that consti tutes the “just for  me” discussion that  follows. To  
anticipate the ar guments, “jus t for me” suggests that the 
topic map should be user-c onstructed . The ontolog y 
(Knowledge Str uctures of Figur e 1), in the cas e of IRIS , is 
constructed b y teams of resear chers; it could have just as  
well been constructed by a committee cre ated by an 
enterpr ise that u ses installa tions of CALO; indeed, it could  
be constructed b y an individu al user in the f irst place, but  
that’s  neither th e cas e for CAL O, nor the cont ext of this  
discussion. Th e issue is this: entities o ther than individual  
users craft th e ontolog y, and u sers craft th eir own topic 
maps. In s ome cases, the ontol ogy can provide all that is 
neces sary to pop ulate such a top ic map; in oth er cases, the 
user might see th ings differ ently. 
 
It is probab ly useful to  digress f or just a moment. Consider  
the ph ysician, or the scientist , or the law yer. For those  
individuals, the ontolog y is probably alread y just for me . 
Such us ers operate closer to the obje ctive en d of the  
continuum mentioned abov e. They inven ted it in the first 
place, and th ey live in it. Ce rtainly, they might p ersonalize 
aspects of it, bu t, for the m ost part, th eir ontolo gy is their  
office users of IRIS, the ontology might or might not 
represent the individual’s way of knowing. Office workers 
don’t generally invent ontologies; for them, knowledge 
engineers provide the ontologies. 
 
The story behind “just for me” is the story behind 
onsider a short story. Jared Spool5 recently spoke to a 
he name for things issue animates discussions of some 
                                                constructivist episte mology, which suggests4 that 
constructivism is about focusing on personally constructed  
reality as opposed to ontological  reality, where ontological 
reality might reflect either fiat or consensus reality. The central notion is that people construct their own reality 
through social interaction; th ey construct their own names 
for things that are identified in social settings, and they construct relationships between those things. It follows that 
users of semantic desktop work stations are going to have 
their own way of organizing what they know and their own 
names for things with which they interact. The tension, as 
we see it, lies in the fact that  the user’s constructed reality 
must co-exist with the group’s consensus (ontological) 
reality. In some cases it co-e xists, and in others, tension 
remains.  
C
web designers’ meeting, speaki ng about the conclusions he 
was able to draw by observing web users purchase cameras 
online. The problem was framed in the context of a sum of 
money given to the purchasers, comparing the sum given to 
the amount of money actually spent on a purchase. He 
observed that, at most websites—for example, amazon.com—something like 110%  of the money given for 
the purchase was spent on the purchase. One particular website stood out by capturing far more money in the 
purchase than was originally budgeted by the buyer—the 
consumer spent more than allocated for the purchase. The 
analysis is revealing. It goes like this. In spite of all of the 
many faceted attributes of the cameras displayed, consumers were mostly intere sted in the pictures they 
would get from the camera, not with number of pixels, lens 
speed, and so forth. To most consumers, cameras were a 
vehicle to get pictures. The site that achieved large sales 
was the site displaying photos taken by the camera. That 
site had discovered a just for me “sweet spot”. The faceted 
attributes were still there, but those attributes were not the ones those consumers were usin g to make the purchase. A 
moral drawn from that story is this: ontologists can design 
elegant taxonomies, and those ma y, or may not, satisfy the 
needs of the consumer (user). It may be that the ontologists 
simply cannot be expected to “think like a user” or 
anticipate all of the many ways in which users categorize 
their personal universe.
 
 
T
existing and emerging technique s. The distinction between 
name and identity comes together through the emerging 
notion of folksonomies,6 and the well-known faceted 
 
4 Statement adapted from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivist_epistemology 
5  Jared Spool: http://www.uie.com/  
6  Folksonomy: http://en.wikipedia.o rg/wiki/Folksonomyclassification7 [12].  While there are some institutional 
faceted classification schemes in existence,8 as for example 
DMOZ,9 other such schemes are crafted as needed by 
individuals and group. Those individual activities are 
indicative of the human need to individualize, or 
personalize,  the ways in which information resources are 
named and identified. 
 
Consider the delicious10 website, where users are 
encouraged to “tag” various websites. Jon Udell explains11 
this tagging process as a means to associate names for 
things, websites in this case. He goes further and casts this 
as a language evolution  process. Constructivism, indeed! 
Tagging, as a process, is not without its critics. For 
instance, L. Jeffrey Zeldman argues12 that tagging replaces 
user-centered taxonomies with usage frequency. Tag clouds  
form which separate related topics from each other. 
Another way to look at tagging is that it is social 
constructivism at work, wher e individuals are practicing 
their “just for me” behaviors,  and evolving those behaviors 
during social interactions. Inde ed, Mimi Yin, who works on 
the Chandler13 project, has much to say about these issues.  
In her recent paper “Hierarchies versus Facets versus Tags” 
[11], she argues, among other things, that hierarchies can 
become “messy” and unmaintainable, and that facetted 
systems don’t offer some of the benefits of hierarchies and 
become too flexible to be useful. 
 
Yin’s writing constitutes anecdotal evidence that open 
questions remain. Adam Mathese, in his paper 
“Folksonomies—Cooperative  Classification and 
Communication through Shared Me tadata,” [13] concludes 
his discussion with the notion that a folksonomy is 
fundamentally uncontrolled in  nature, suffering imprecision 
and ambiguity, but at the sa me time, free-form tagging 
allows for self-organizatio n of information resources. 
 
In the context of IRIS and “just for me”, we take the view 
that tagging really is just for the individual user, and not 
necessarily for the group, unless the group dynamic 
chooses to encourage it. The role of a topic map with 
groups of IRIS users would be to permit personal topic 
maps to reflect personal nami ng conventions locally while 
linking to a group topic map, say, on a server, which 
reflects consensus naming c onventions. Mappings between 
the two are mediated by subject identity properties reflected in the consensus ontology. At the desktop level, we are 
certainly not alone in this notion. Murray Altheim has 
implemented faceted classification in Ceryle [18], a 
semantic desktop application created to organize those 
knowledge assets necessary for authorship
. 
                                                 
7  Faceted Classification: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faceted_classification
8  Just about every online catalog uses facets, e.g., price, 
shipping weight, lens speed, color, etc. 
9  DMOZ: http://www.dmoz.org/ 
10  delicious: http://del.icio.us/ 
11  Jon Udell: 
http://weblog.infoworld.com/udell/gems/delicious.html 
12  Zeldman: http://zeldm an.com/daily/0505a.shtml 
13  Chandler: http://www.osafoundation.org/ 
2.2 Tensions between “ontology-driven” 
and personal topic map 
…when thinking about ontologies and semantic web it 
is easy to focus on the requirements of precision and 
data integration to the exclusion of the requirements 
for end user navigation 
 –Dave Reynolds, et al. [17] 
 
Semantic interoperability demands consensus identity, and some consensus name s; personal views, just for me , call for 
personal naming conventions alongside consensus subject 
identity. Let us cont rast these views: 
 
• Separate ontology and topic map 
o Topic map, itself, doesn’t necessarily 
have to support consensus names for 
things 
• Topic map as ontology  
o User’s lens topic map directly supports 
user names for things along with 
consensus names for things  
 
If IRIS is to have a topic map,14 then, in the near term, it 
will be separate from the ontology. It is not inconceivable that some future version of IRIS could migrate to a topic 
map as ontology architecture. For now, the tension exists 
because IRIS, indeed, all semantic desktop workstations, 
are, essentially, just for me  platforms and the intuition is 
that a topic map can mediate between the interoperability need for a consensus ontology and the user’s need for a 
personal lens into that workspace. 
 
2.3 A Solution: Topic Maps as Mediators 
 
Consider a patient-doctor scenario, the context of which is a vision problem where the patient says “…the world is going Picasso  on me.” The doctor replys with “Well, we 
call that syndrome scintillating scotoma ; it’s one of the 
many kinds of migraine head aches people can experience.” 
The doctor is working from a medical ontology, and, based on years of experience, has a pretty good idea of how 
patients are liable to describe  their signs and symptoms. In 
the simple office world  of IRIS, let us imagine some office 
worker relating the proper name Joseph P. Sixpack  to a 
favored way to recall that person, say, Bubba. The rest of 
the world doesn’t need to know about “Bubba”, but, if 
association of a specific person to a favored name renders 
the user’s life simpler, less hectic, and more productive, 
then it’s useful to provide for such mediation. 
 
                                                 
14 A small, focused topic map existed in the original 
prototype, but was set aside to facilitate evolution of 
other functionality. A focused topic map means that a 
small map of specific aspects of the user’s world was 
created as the user entered that world. For instance, a 
general topic map of all peopl e and of all projects existed 
in the background, and fragments of those maps appeared, for instance, in the tasks view. Topic maps offer a simple paradigm  from which a 
candidate solution to the just for me  issue emerges. The 
topic maps paradigm simply  suggests that, for each subject , 
there can exist in a given topic map, at most, one topic , 
where a topic is best-imagine d as a container, nexus or 
proxy for the subject, at wh ich all presently-knowable 
information related to the subject can be found. The nexus 
concept evokes the image of a topic as a hub around which 
all information resources related to the subject radiate.  
 
While topic mapping, the para digm, itself, continues to 
evolve, there remains a core set of notions, a core ontology 
which guides application de velopers. Core to topic 
mapping are the elements: topic , and association . With 
those two core elements, a slightly broader ontology grows. 
We draw on the concept of scope  to construct a solution to 
the just for me  issue.  
 
A scope represents a context , and, as such, is, itself, a 
subject represented by a topic. Names for topics can take 
scopes. That is, a particular na me for some subject might be 
a string written and scoped in the English, a string written 
and scoped in the German, and name strings written in 
other languages, all representations of a name for the 
subject. Scopes can also be used to provide context other 
than language. Scoping Bubba as a private  name string in a 
topic map might mean that this name string will not appear in the public transmission of data between IRIS 
installations. Using scoped names  thus permits a user to 
inject favored names for things.  
 
Using scoped associations , a topic map permits a user to 
inject favored relationships into the knowledgebase without 
risk of those relationships altering the semantic interoperability of the larger ontology. Topic maps thus 
provide a useful means by which users of ontology-driven 
workstations can personalize their working environment. 
 
Implementing a topic map in a semantic desktop 
application as a means of satisfying a just for me  
requirement avails other poten tial benefits. For instance, 
the inherent indexical capabili ties of topic maps are suited 
to many of the needs already satisfied by the ontology. That 
opens the door to two larger questions: could a topic map 
satisfy the need for an ontology, and could the ontology 
satisfy the need for a topic map ? Both, great questions, and 
each suggests avenues for future research. While other 
workers are already exploring those questions, we believe 
the opportunity to implement an ontology as a topic map 
remains an important opportunity since that one structure 
can satisfy both semantic interoperability and just for me 
requirements. For the present wo rk, it is shown that a topic 
map can mediate between tw o important needs, those 
related to the user and HCI, and those related to semantic 
interoperability between workstations. 
 
We have discussed personali zed names for things and 
personalized relationships betw een things. Another issue is, 
and will remain for a long time in the future, that of subject 
identity. For instance, IRIS exists in an email-rich universe, 
where the names of unknown (to IRIS) persons appear 
frequently. CALO provides a framework wherein new 
persons are isolated and studied by a variety of means, the 
intent being to disambiguate identities. For instance, one 
email might come in from, say, jpark@foo.org and 
another from jackpark@bar.com. A question is this: 
do both emails refer to the sa me individual? That is a 
nontrivial question, and it mirrors the subject identity issues 
facing topic maps during mergi ng processes. IRIS includes 
a harvesting framework which includes some tools for 
name resolution. More powerful tools are included in 
CALO. 
 
Where does IRIS presently stand in relation to resolving the 
just for me  issue? We have cast IRIS as a kind of topic map 
for personal knowledge assets, a ssets which must reside in 
a networked community. We are not claiming that IRIS is a 
topic map in the sense understood in terms of XTM 
documents, merging tools and so forth. Rather, IRIS 
continuously orbits in the sp ace of tensions between the 
necessity to use an ontology to organize information resources for purposes of interoperability betw een software 
agents involved in processing those resources and other semantic desktop installations, and between the user’s need 
semantic desktop installations, and between the user’s need 
to capture individual ways of knowing and doing. 
3. BACKGROUND 
There are several threads related to the background from which IRIS, topic maps, ontologies, and the issue we 
found. In the end, they all relate to the ever-increasing rate 
at which sound decisions must be made in the context of 
ever-increasing amounts of information to process in order 
to achieve those decisions. Out of the need to index a 
growing body of software documentation (one form of 
infoglut), topic maps were created. As Steven R. Newcomb 
said in his introduction to topic mapping in the book XML 
Topic Maps  [2, page 32],  
Information is both more and less real than the 
material universe. It’s mo re real because it will 
survive any physical c hange; it will outlast any 
physical manifestation of itself. It’s less real because 
it’s ineffable. For example, you can touch a shoe, but 
you can’t touch the notion of “shoe-ness” (that is, 
what it means to be a shoe). The notion of shoe-ness is 
probably eternal, but every shoe is ephemeral. 
 
As topic mapping technology matures and enters 
mainstream application in ever more complex indexical and 
organizational situations, user interface issues bubble to the 
foreground. Indexical and associative applications require 
attention to two core issues: subject identity  and names for 
things . Recent innovation on the web,15 the notion of social 
bookmarking, for instance, is pointing the way toward a 
web that satisfies a just for me16 requirement. The 
combination of rising popularity and high level of 
                                                 
15E.g. http://www.flickr.com/  and http://del.icio.us/   
16 The term just for me was first introduced to the first author by 
Nancy Glock-Grueneich in the context of pedagogy. The 
context is this: regular school learning is sometimes described 
as “just in case”; by contrast, constructivist learning is described 
as “just in time”, and Nancy sugge sts that real learning is best 
described as “just for me.” innovation in this arena strongly suggests that the just for 
me requirement should be investigated at the desktop 
application level, along with the web. 
 
We now live and work in a networked global village; the 
term infoglut  has become the meme that reminds us of the 
information overload we experience in our daily lives, and about which Vannevar Bush el oquently wrote in his 1945 
paper, “As We May Think” [10] . Indeed, it was that paper 
which inspired Ted Nelson, Douglas Engelbart, and many 
others to try to find solutions to the infoglut problem and 
augment human capabilities for solving complex, urgent 
problems. 
 
IRIS has been developed as part of SRI’s CALO17 project, 
one of two projects funded under DARPA’s “Perceptive 
Assistant that Learns” (PAL) program.18 The goal of the 
PAL program is to develop an  enduring personal assistant 
that “learns in the wild,” evolving its abilities more and 
more through automated machine learning techniques 
rather than through code changes. In approaching the 
design and development of IRIS, we took much inspiration 
from the work of Douglas Engelbart, who performed much 
of his early work while employed at SRI. While Ted 
Nelson’s Xanadu19 [3] was arguably the first project to set 
the stage for modern hyperdocument processors, Engelbart’s Augment
20 was the first system to find 
engagement in group document processing and sharing. In 1968, at the Fall Joint Computer Conference in San 
Francisco, Engelbart demonstr ated Augment before a live 
audience.
21 Augment displayed many of the capabilities we 
now want to build into modern semantic desktop 
applications. Augm ent, the program, saw commercial 
application, and is still used today by Dr. Engelbart in his 
day-to-day activities. 
 
Central to our work is the augmentation program , first 
proposed by J.C.R. Licklider (who funded Engelbart’s 
work) in 1960 [5]. The emphasis of that program was to 
augment human capabilities with computers, as we see in 
the Engelbart work, as then compared to the artificial 
intelligence program  (AI), in which human capabilities are 
mimicked or otherwise provided by computers. CALO 
represents a blending of th e AI and the augmentation 
programs. 
 
There is a clear and vibrant link between topic maps and 
the augmentation program. We see opportunities for that 
link in IRIS, because the program integrates several desktop office productivity to ols, such as email, web 
browsing, calendar, instant messaging, and more. At the 
                                                 
17 CALO is an acronym for “Cognitive Assistant that Learns and 
Organizes.” CALO’s name was also  inspired by the Latin word 
calonis , which means “soldier’s serv ant” and conjures an image 
of Radar O’Reilly from the M*A*S*H TV series. 
18 DARPA’s PAL program: 
http://www.darpa.mil/ipto/programs/pal/   
19 Xanadu: http://xanadu.com/ 
20NLS/Augment at the Computer History Museum: 
http://community.computerhistory.org/scc/projects/nlsproject/ 
21  Videos of the first online document editing project. Found on 
the web at http://sloan.stanfor d.edu/MouseSite/1968Demo.html 
same time, IRIS provides a framework that supports 
aspects  of art ificial int elligen ce and m achine le arning, al l in 
support of aid ing the user in assembling, indexing , 
cluster ing and otherwise organ izing a growin g bod y of 
knowledge assets. 
 
In order to better understand how IRIS can be cast as a 
topic map for p ersonal knowled ge assets, we n ow briefly 
sketch thos e aspects of IRIS  that make up the let ters in the 
name. IRIS is first and foremost an integration  framework. 
Whereas  in tod ay’s packag ed appli cations suites, where  
only loose data integr ation ex ists22 (usuall y limited to the  
clipbo ard and  common look-and-feel for menus and dialog  
boxes), IRIS strives to in tegrate d ata from  disparate 
applications using reified semantic classes and ty ped 
relations. For in stance, it should  be possible to express that 
“File F  was pres ented  at Meeting  M by Tom Jones,  who is  
the Project M anager  of Project  X,” even  if the  file 
manager, calend ar program, co ntact database, and project 
management sof tware are s eparately  developed third-party 
applications. In a Topic Maps  fashion, th ere sh ould be a 
single ins tance that represents each concep t, and all that is 
knowable abou t that concept sh ould be dir ectly accessible 
from that instan ce [2] . 
 
The IRIS f ramework offers in tegration  servic es at three  
levels (Figure 2) : 
 
1. Information res ources (e.g ., an em ail m essage, a 
calendar appointment) and the applications that create 
and manipulate them must be  made ac cessible to IRIS 
for instrumentation, au tomation , and quer y.  
2. A knowledge base (KB) provides the unified data 
model, pers istence store, and qu ery mechan isms acros s 
the information r esources a nd semantic relations among 
them .  
3. The IRIS  user interfa ce fr amework allows  plug-in  
appli cations to embed their own interf aces within IRIS , 
and to  interoper ate wi th glob al UI services. 
 
The IRIS  user interf ace p rovides the “ shell” f or hos ting 
several embedded applications (Figure 3). Two side panels  
frame the main  applicati on window, one fo r selecting  
among availab le applications, th e other for display ing and  
editing sem antic links for the selected appli cation object  
and presenting contex tual sugg estions from the learning  
framework.  A pplications can  add toolb ars to the IRIS 
fram e, and whe n selected, an application’s menu items are 
“merged” with IRIS m enu function ality present for a ll 
appli cations. IRIS provides an extensible contex t-sensitive  
online h elp system and sever al methods for quer ying 
inform ation r esources with in and acros s appli cations. 
 
IRIS is used to sem antically integr ate th e tools of 
knowledge work , to form relatio nships  between knowledge 
assets. W hat do we m ean b y this ? We use  the t erm 
“semantic” in the s ense us ed b y the S emantic W eb 
                                                 
22 Even within a single application,  deep data integr ation i s usually 
pretty threadbar e. Consider  Micro soft Outlook: the e mail 
addresses display ed in a message  are not linkable ( or deeply 
related)  to the people r ecords in your contacts folder . community , where markup techn ologies are b eing wedded 
to the tools of sem antic re presentation (e.g., ontologies , 
OWL, RDF). T his fac ilitates putting d ata on the web in 
such a wa y that machines  can a ccess it, m ake meaningful  
referen ces to it, and perform manipulations on it, including  
reasoning and  inference. In  that sense, IRIS pr ovides an  
OWL-based ontolog y and backside b y which th e artif acts 
of a us er’s experien ce such as  email m essages, calend ar 
events, files on the disk or found  on the web , can be stored  
and rel ated to each o ther a cross applicat ions and acros s 
users. 
 
When defining the ontolog y to be used for IRI S, a design  
choice had  to be made: Do we  use a small, simple ontolog y 
or a complex, more-expre ssive onto logy? We first 
implem ented a fairl y large , yet straightforward , ontolog y. 
However, the requirement th at IRIS interope rate with  
CALO’s reasoning and learnin g capab ilities d rove us to  
adopt CALO’s preexisting ontolog y, which supports roles, 
events , and com plex d ata structures. 
 
Additionally , IRIS provi des a framework for  harvesting  
application data and instrume nting  user a ctions in IRIS 
applications. Th e harvesting of  data ref ers to im porting 
extern al data into semantic (onto logy-based) stru ctures.  
 
 
Figure 2:  IRIS Architectur e 
One of the key  differen tiators of IR IS, com pared to m any 
semantic desktop s ystems, is the  emphasis on ma chine 
learn ing and the implementation of a plug-and-play 
learn ing framework, providing the ability  for IR IS to make 
inferen ces. We see m achine l earning as  one of the s olutions 
around a key  issue lim iting the S emantic Web’s g rowth and 
mass adoption: Who is going to enter all of th e requ ired 
links and  knowledge?  
 
Prior to the Internet, th e last technolog y that had any 
real effect on the way people sat down and  talked 
togeth er was the table. 
  –Clay  Shirk y23  
                                                 
23 Clay  Shirky: at Emerging Techn ology Confer ence 2003 
http://shirk y.com/writings/group_enem y.html 
 
Sharing  information is one of the four ke y con cepts  that 
make up the IR IS vision. W e feel that the ability to learn 
and lev erage semantic struc ture in organizing o ne’s work 
life wi ll be greatly enhan ced i n a co llabor ative sett ing. 
Shared s tructu res are es sential for bo th end-us er 
appli cations, such as  team  decision making and project 
management, and for infr astructural components such as 
machine l earnin g algorithm s, which improve when given  
larger  data sets to work on. 
Figure 3:  The IRIS Platform 
4. REL ATED WORK 
 
Several  proje cts exist and ar e similar in  spirit  and inte nt to 
IRIS. We sketch a few of them h ere,.Two projects of great 
significance to the personaliza tion of information resources 
are Lifes treams24 and WorldBoard.25 Life streams is the  
vision of David Gelernter,  and was develo ped as a 
dissertation project b y Eric Freeman [15] . WorldBoard is  
the outgrowth o f the vision of  Jim Spohrer from his paper  
“Inform ation in P laces” [16] . Whereas  Lifestreams speaks 
mostly  to local individu al needs, WorldBoa rd spe aks to 
Global individu al and  group n eeds. 
 
While dev elopin g IRIS, we explored Hay stack26 from MIT. 
When we dis covered this  proj ect [8], we were amazed how  
well i t fit our  initial designs f or IRIS, in  terms of both 
archi tecture and user inte rface des ign, wi th the added  
benefit of being  Java-based and  open source. We learned  
much from a vi sit by Dennis Quan, one of the principal 
develop ers, and  did, indeed , begin th e task o f adapting  
Haystack’s significan t code ba se to our framewo rk. For a 
variety  of r easons, we ende d up moving in a differen t 
direction, bu t Hay stack and Dr . Quan’s deep kn owledge of  
the subject gave us a solid start. 
 
                                                 
                                                24 Life streams: 
http://www. cs.yale. edu/homes /freeman/lifestreams. html 
25 WorldBoard: http://www. worldboard. org/ 
26 Haystack: http://haystack.lcs.mit.edu/ The n ext system we eva luated wa s the Radar Networks27 
Personal Rad ar, a v ery impres sive semantic d esktop that 
turned out to share man y of th e goals and requ irements for 
IRIS: Java-based, ontolog y-driven, us er-centric. We have  
combined e lements of P ersonal Radar into the  IRIS code 
base. 
 
Well down the path of implem enting IRIS, we discovered  
two additional p rojects. Gnowsis.28 Gnowsis [9] a ppears to 
offer integr ation with m any of the sam e third-part y 
appli cations as IRIS , and t o share m any similar 
philosophies regarding applicat ion and data integration.  
MindRaider ,29 is a project arguably  close to IRIS, 
Haystack, and Gnowsis in spirit  and int ent.  
 
Ontologies  hav e becom e the lingua franca  of semantic 
interop erability. Program s suc h as Ha ystack, IRIS, and 
others are, essentially , driven b y onto logies . This means 
that oper ations b y users, data  items such as  email m essages 
and cal endar eve nts, and com munications between different  
platform s, are all perform ed in the contex t of a buil t-in 
ontolog y. Outside of desktops, SHOE [4]  represents an  
early  appro ach to providing for semantic in terop erability  on 
the web . SHOE is an on tolog y-based languag e. Today , the 
OWL web ont ology languag e is rapidly  becoming a 
standard for r epresenting on tologies. Th e IRIS ontolog y is 
implem ented in OW L. 
5. CONCL USIONS 
 
IRIS  is the platf orm that allowe d its creators  to experi ence 
the tensions we have discusse d here. The s ystem is now i n 
daily  oper ation as the primar y office env ironm ent used by 
several m embers of the CALO com munity. In  that dai ly 
use, and durin g trials b y developers, we continue to  
encounter users who wish they  could add  tags  or otherwise 
provide names f or objects , or forge relationships  between 
objec ts such as  files on the h ard disk and em ails or cal endar  
events. A growing awareness of  this issue is propagating 
some rethinkin g regarding the design of the IRIS 
knowledgebase. This reth inking allows for th e opportunity 
to im plem ent a  topic m ap link ed to the on tolog y and driven  
by the user  interface . With the addition  of a  topic m ap to 
IRIS, users will be ab le to  provide th eir own names and 
relationships, and still  rem ain semantically interoperabl e 
with th e rest of the com munity. 
 
We have argued that a personal topic map , one that  
mediates between a user and an  ontolog y, is a candid ate 
solution to th e just for me  issue. We believe th at our work 
with IRIS and CALO supports  our claim that semantic 
desktop applications which use ontolog ies fo r semantic 
interop erability can benef it from  the applic ation of personal 
topic maps. We offer a concludi ng conjec ture th at the top ic 
map, itself , might server the role of the ontolog y, providing 
both semantic interoper ability  and just for me user support. 
 
 
27 RadarNetworks: http:/ /www. radarnetworks. com/ 
28 Gnowsis: http://www.gnowsis.or g/ 
29 MindRaider:  http://mindraid er.sourceforge .net/ 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Contract No. 
NBCHD030010. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions 
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
DARPA or the Department of Interior-National Business 
Center (DOI-NBC). 
 
We would like to thank those SRI and non-SRI CALO 
members, too many to name, who are working with us to 
integrate their cutting-edge technologies into the IRIS 
learning framework. We also would like to thank the 
anonymous reviewers, Glen B. Haydon, Patrick Durusau, 
Ray Perrault, and Josh Levy for comments on an early draft 
of this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Decker, Stefan; and Martin Frank, “The Social Semantic 
Desktop,” 2004. On the web at 
http://www.deri.at/publications/techpapers/documents/D
ERI-TR-2004-05-02.pdf   
2. Park, Jack, Editor, and Sa m Hunting, Technical Editor, 
XML Topic Maps: Creating and Using Topic Maps for 
the Web , Boston, MA. Addison-Wesley, 2003  
3. Nelson, Theodor von Holm , “Xanalogical Structure, 
Needed Now More than Ever: Parallel Documents, 
Deep Links to Content, Deep  Versioning, and Deep Re-
Use.” ACM Computing Surveys 31(4), December 1999. 
On the web at 
http://www.cs.brown.edu/me mex/ACM_HypertextTestb
ed/papers/60.html
4. Heflin, Jeff and James Hendler, “Semantic 
Interoperability on the Web,” 2000. On the web at 
http://www.cs.umd.edu/proj ects/plus/SHOE/pubs/extre
me2000.pdf 
5. Licklider, J.C.R., “Man-C omputer Symbiosis”, 1960. On 
the web at http://memex.org/licklider.pdf 
6. Pepper, Steve, “The TAO of  Topic Maps,” Ontopia. On 
the web at 
http://www.ontopia.net/topi cmaps/materi als/tao.html
7. Vatant, Bernard, “Ontolog y-driven Topic Maps”, XML 
Europe 2004, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.  On the web at 
http://www.idealliance.org/ europe/04/call/xmlpapers/03-
03-03.91/.03-03-03.html
8. Karger, David R., Karun Bakshi, David Huynh, Dennis 
Quan, and Vineet Sinha, “Haystack: A Customizable 
General-Purpose Information Management Tool for End 
Users of Semistructured Data,” in CIDR 2005, Asilomar, 
California. On the web at http://www-
db.cs.wisc.edu/cidr/cidr2005/papers/P02.pdf   
9. Sauermann, Leo, “The Gn owsis Semantic Desktop for 
Information Integration,” in IOA 2005, Kaiserlauten, 
Germany. On the web at http://www.dfki.uni-
kl.de/~sauermann/papers/Sauermann2005a.pdf
10. Bush, Vannevar, “As We May Think,” The Atlantic 
Monthly, July 1945. On the web at 
http://www.theatlan tic.com/doc/194507/bush11. Yin, Mimi, “Hierarchy versus Facets versus Tags”, July 
11, 2005. On the web at 
http://wiki.osafoundation.org/bin/view/Journal/Hierarchy
VersusFacetsVersusTags
12. Yin, Mimi, “Preface to Hierarchy Papers”, July 14, 
2005. On the web at 
http://wiki.osafoundation.org/bin/view/Journal/PrefaceT
oHierarchyPapers
13. Mathes, Adam, “Folksonomies – Cooperative 
Classification and Communication Through Shared Metadata,” December 2004. On the web at 
http://www.adammathes.c om/academic/computer-
mediated-communicati on/folksonomies.html
14. Cheyer, Adam, Jack Park, and Richard Giuli, “IRIS: 
Integrate. Relate. Infer. Share,” submitted to the 1st 
International Workshop on The Semantic Desktop, Galway, Ireland, 6 November 2005. 
15. Freeman, Eric Thomas, “The Lifestreams Software 
Architecture”, Ph.D. Dissertation, Yale University, May 
1997. On the web at 
http://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/f reeman/dissertation/etf.p
df
16. Spohrer, James C., “Information In Places”, IBM 
Systems Journal, Vol 38, No 4, 1999. On the web at 
http://www.research.ibm.c om/journal/sj/384/spohrer.htm
l
17. Reynolds, Dave, Paul Shabajee, Steve Cayzer, and 
Damian Steer, “SWAD-Europe deliverable 12.1.7: 
Semantic Portals Demonstrat or- Lessons Learnt”, Sept. 
2004. On the web at  
http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/Europe/reports/demo_2_rep
ort/
18. Altheim, Murray, “Ceryle and “Grass Roots” 
Ontologies,” Ceryle Blog, Feb. 10, 2005. On the web at http://www.altheim.com/ceryle/blog 
 
View publication statsView publication stats
