Machine Reasoning Explainability
Kristijonas ˇCyras, Ramamurthy Badrinath, Swarup Kumar Mohalik,
Anusha Mujumdar, Alexandros Nikou, Alessandro Previti,
Vaishnavi Sundararajan, Aneta Vulgarakis Feljan
Ericsson Research
September 2, 2020
Abstract
As a ﬁeld of AI, Machine Reasoning (MR) uses largely symbolic means to formalize and em-
ulate abstract reasoning. Studies in early MR have notably started inquiries into Explainable AI
(XAI) – arguably one of the biggest concerns today for the AI community. Work on explainable
MR as well as on MR approaches to explainability in other areas of AI has continued ever since. It
is especially potent in modern MR branches, such as argumentation, constraint and logic program-
ming, planning. We hereby aim to provide a selective overview of MR explainability techniques
and studies in hopes that insights from this long track of research will complement well the current
XAI landscape. This document reports our work in-progress on MR explainability.
1 Introduction
Machine Reasoning (MR) is a ﬁeld of AI that complements the ﬁeld of Machine Learning (ML)
by aiming to computationally mimic abstract thinking. This is done by way of uniting known (yet
possibly incomplete) information with background knowledge and making inferences regarding un-
known or uncertain information. MR has outgrown Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR,
see e.g. [27]) and now encompasses various symbolic and hybrid AI approaches to automated rea-
soning. Central to MR are two components: a knowledge base (see e.g. [61]; common in Axiom
Pinpointing, Automated Theorem Proving (ATP) and Proof Assistants, Non-classical Logic-Based
Reasoning (Logic Programming), Argumentation) or a model of the problem (see e.g. [89]; com-
mon in Constraint Programming (CP), Planning, Decision Theory, Reinforcement Learning), which
Corresponding author. Email: kristijonas.cyras@ericsson.com , ORCiD: 0000-0002-4353-8121
1arXiv:2009.00418v1  [cs.AI]  1 Sep 2020
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
formally represents knowledge and relationships among problem components in symbolic, machine-
processable form; and a general-purpose inference engine or solving mechanism, which allows to
manipulate those symbols and perform semantic reasoning.1
The ﬁeld of Explainable AI (XAI, see e.g. [1, 13, 20, 54, 130, 146, 149, 155, 169, 177, 196])
encompasses endeavors to make AI systems intelligible to their users, be they humans or machines.
XAI comprises research in AI as well as interdisciplinary research at the intersections of AI and
subjects ranging from Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), see e.g. [149], to social sciences, see e.g.
[33, 144]. Explainability of AI is often seen as a crucial driver for the real-world deployment of
trustworthy modern AI systems.
According to e.g. Hansen and Rieger in [100], explainability was one of the main distinctions
between the 1st(dominated by KR and rule-based systems) and the 2nd(expert systems and statis-
tical learning) waves of AI, with expert systems addressing the problems of explainability and ML
approaches treated as black boxes. With the ongoing 3rdwave of AI, ML explainability has received
a great surge of interest [13, 54, 149]. By contrast therefore, it seems that a revived interest in MR
explainability is only just picking up pace (e.g. ECAI 2020 Spotlight tutorial on Argumentative Ex-
planations in AI2and KR 2020 Workshop on Explainable Logic-Based Knowledge Representation3).
However, explainability in MR dates over four decades, see e.g. [100, 110, 151, 155, 196]. Explain-
ability in MR can be roughly outlined thus.
1stgeneration expert systems provide only so-called ( reasoning )trace explanations , showing in-
ference rules that led to a decision. A major problem with trace explanations is the lack of “informa-
tion with respect to the system’s general goals and resolution strategy”[151, p. 174]. 2ndgeneration
expert systems instead provide so-called strategic explanations , revealing “why information is gath-
ered in a certain order, why one knowledge piece is invoked before others and how reasoning steps
contribute to high-level goals”[151, p. 174]. Going further, so-called deep explanations separating the
domain model from the structural knowledge have been sought, where “the system has to try to ﬁgure
out what the user knows or doesn’t know, and try to answer the question taking that into account.”[204,
p. 73] Progress in MR explainability notwithstanding, it can been argued (see e.g. [137, 151, 169])
that to date, explainability in MR particularly and perhaps in AI at large is still insufﬁcient in aspects
such as justiﬁcation, criticism, and cooperation. These aspects, among others, are of concern in the
modern MR explainability scene (around year 2000 onwards), whereby novel approaches to explain-
ability in various branches of MR have been making appearances. We review some of them here and
spell out the explainability questions addressed therein.
1See, however, e.g. [25] for an alternative view of MR stemming from a sub-symbolic/connectionist perspective.
2https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/ afr114/ecaitutorial/
3https://lat.inf.tu-dresden.de/XLoKR20/
2 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
1.1 Motivation
The following summarizes our motivations and assumptions in this work.
1. We appreciate that MR is not yet a commonplace AI term, unlike e.g. ML or KR. We recognize
that MR has evolved from KR and comprises other, mostly symbolic, forms of reasoning in AI.
However, we here do not attempt to characterize MR, let alone cover all of its branches. Rather,
we focus on the MR branches that most prominently exhibit approaches to explainability. Our
overview of MR explainability is therefore bounded in scope. Nonetheless, it is dictated by our
(invariably limited) professional understanding of the most relevant (e.g. historically important,
well established and widely applicable, or trending) MR contributions to XAI.
2. Accordingly, we acknowledge that explainability in AI has been studied for a while and has
in time evolved in terms of (a) areas of AI and (b) desiderata. Yet, we maintain that the foun-
dational contributions and the lessons learnt (as well as forgotten) from the research on ex-
plainability in KR and expert systems are still very much relevant to both MR explainability in
particular, and XAI at large. Speciﬁcally:
(a) Adaptations of long established MR explainability techniques (Classical Logic-Based
Reasoning and Non-classical Logic-Based Reasoning (Logic Programming); see Sections
3.1 and 3.2 respectively) have found their ways into newer MR areas (for instance, Axiom
Pinpointing in Description Logics and Planning; see Sections 3.1.1 and 3.5 respectively).
(b) Relatively newer MR branches, such as Answer Set Programming (ASP, Section 3.2.3)
and Argumentation (Section 3.3), necessitate and inform newer forms of explainability.
In particular, previously established techniques of mostly logical inference attribution do
not sufﬁce anymore, see e.g. [82, 123, 151, 204]. On the one hand, some modern MR
approaches, such as ASP and Constraint Programming (CP, Section 3.1.2), currently pro-
vide techniques that can effectively be considered interpretable but whose workings are
nevertheless difﬁcult to explain. On the other hand, XAI desiderata now include aiming
for dialogical/conversational explanations, interactivity, actionability as well as causality.
These rediscovered concerns are being addressed by modern MR approaches to explain-
ability. Thus, various branches of MR are concerned with explainability anew.
3. We maintain that modern MR systems can hardly be called explainable just by virtue of being
symbolic4, in contrast to early expert and intelligent systems often being referred to thus [1].
However, we speculate and contend that MR presumably offers more immediate intelligibility
than e.g. ML. Perhaps this is what lends MR explainability approaches to be applied to both MR
itself and other areas of research, such as ML (e.g. [3, 15, 51, 106, 185]), decision support and
recommender systems (e.g. [45, 80, 158, 172]), planning (e.g. [38, 44, 69, 74, 81]), scheduling
4Where symbolic entities carry intrinsic semantical meaning and are perhaps more readily interpretable and intelligible
than the algebraic-symbolic entities in sub-symbolic/connectionist AI.
3 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
(e.g. [58]), legal informatics (e.g. [17, 57]), scientiﬁc debates (e.g. [183]). We speculate that
it is also potentially the theoretical guarantees often ensured by MR methods that make MR
explainability appealing, cf. e.g. [105, 187].
4. Most recent overviews of general XAI appear to focus mostly on ML and somewhat ignore
MR, e.g. [1, 13, 96, 146, 149, 177], apart from potentially brieﬂy discussing early expert sys-
tems. (See however [158] for a systematic review of explanations in decision support and rec-
ommender systems, where MR constitutes majority of the referenced approaches; reviews of
explainability in e.g. ASP [78] and Planning [44] are also welcome examples of not-so-common
area-speciﬁc MR overviews.) We feel that having a broader view of the XAI agenda is crucial
in general and that an overview of MR explainability is due for at least the following reasons.
(a) Explainable MR constitutes a rich body of research whose works span many branches of
MR with long histories. A consolidated, even if limited, overview will provide guidance
to exploring and building on this research.
(b) MR explainability techniques are also used for e.g. explainable ML and an overview will
help AI researchers to see a bigger picture of XAI as well as to promote innovation and
collaboration.
(c) XAI has arguably started with explainable MR and some of the same conceptual MR
explainability techniques can be (and are being) applied to achieve current XAI goals.
An MR explainability overview may allow researchers to rediscover known problems and
solutions (potentially saving from reinventing things) and to give credit where it is due.
1.2 Contributions
Our contributions in this report are as follows.
1. Building on conceptual works on XAI as well as XAI overviews, we propose a loose catego-
rization of MR explainability approaches in terms of broad families of explanations, namely
attributive ,contrastive andactionable .
2. We provide an overview of some prominent approaches to MR explainability, differentiating by
branches of MR and indicating the families that such explanations roughly belong to.
3. We indicate what kinds of questions the explanations aim to answer.
This is not a systematic review, but rather an overview of conceptual techniques that MR brings
to XAI. We do not claim to be exhaustive or even completely representative of the various MR ap-
proaches to explainability, let alone to characterize what counts as a branch of MR. Rather, we hope
to enable the reader to see a bigger picture of XAI, focusing speciﬁcally on what we believe amounts
to MR explainability.
4 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
1.3 Omissions
In this report, we omit the following aspects of XAI.
We leave out the following research areas that could potentially be considered related to MR.
1. Rule-based classiﬁcation/prediction, e.g. [209], which comprises of largely ML-focused
approaches for associative/predictive rule generation and/or extraction. Overviews of such
rule-based ML explainability can be found in e.g. [1, 9, 13, 96].
2. Neuro-symbolic computing and graph neural networks, see e.g. [129] for an overview,
where the use of classical logics alongside ML techniques has recently been argued as
a factor enabling explainability. Other works use classical logic for approximation and
human-readable representation of ML workings. For instance, the authors in [47, 48]
use neural networks to learn relationships between ML classiﬁer outputs and interpret
those relationships using Boolean variables that represent neuron activations as well as
predicates that represent the classiﬁcation outputs. These then yield human-readable ﬁrst-
order logic descriptions of the learned relationships. Neuro-symbolic computing com-
prises heavily of ML-focused approaches that we deem beyond the scope of this report on
MR explainability.
3. Probabilistic reasoning, which is a ﬁeld (of Mathematics as well as Computer Science)
in itself, and spans AI at large. We meet several explanation-oriented approaches when
discussing various MR branches, but we do not separately consider Bayesian Networks or
Probabilistic Graphical Models among MR branches with a focus on explainability.
4. Game theory, which is a ﬁeld of Mathematics that studies strategic interaction between
rational decision makers. In AI, game theory provides foundations to reasoning with pref-
erences, multi-agent systems (MAS) and mechanism design among others, possibly with
the beneﬁt of enabling explainability. SHAP (Shapley additive explanations) [140] is a
well-known example of application of game theory to explainability in ML as well as MR
(e.g. [126]). We do not think that game-theoretic approaches constitute a branch of MR,
or at least not one with a particular focus to explainability. We do, however, review some
related approaches to explainability from Decision Theory.
5. Robotics, which is an interdisciplinary branch of Engineering and Computer Science. In
terms of explainability, the cornerstone notion there is explainable agency [130], which
amounts to an autonomous agent being able to do the following:
(a) explain decisions made during plan generation;
(b) report which actions it executed;
(c) explain how actual events diverged from a plan and how it adapted in response;
(d) communicate its decisions and reasons.
In [10] Anjomshoae et al. review explainable agency approaches where goal-driven agents
5 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
and robots purport to explain their actions to a human user. We encounter some approaches
to explainability of autonomous agents which belong to speciﬁc branches of MR such as
Planning. Generally, however, explainable agency considers human-AI interaction aspects
which we do not cover in this report.
Medium of explanations, i.e. whether explanations are textual, graphical, etc., see e.g. [93,
128, 149, 189]. However important, these are largely human-AI interaction aspects, beyond the
scope of this report.
Evaluation of explanations is beyond the scope of this report too. We believe that, on the one
hand, well-established computational metrics for systematic comparison and evaluation of ex-
planations are generally lacking [97],5which we believe is especially true with respect to MR
approaches to explainability. On the other hand, we believe that research on evaluation of,
particularly, MR explainability approaches via human user studies is complicated and not yet
mature either, see e.g. [149].
We hope these omissions do not lessen our contribution of a conceptual overview of MR explain-
ability.
2 Explainability
We brieﬂy discuss here the main purposes of explanations in AI systems and present a categorization
of explanations. We propose that, intuitively, the main purpose of explanations in XAI is to enable the
user of an AI system to not only understand (to a certain extent) the system, but also to do something
with the explanation. We suggest this entails that the explanations answer some sort of questions about
the AI system dealing with the problem at hand. The kinds of answers provided by the explanations
will help us to loosely categorize them, enabled by approaches to explainability in MR.
2.1 Purpose of Explanations
At large, the purpose of explainability of an AI system can be seen to be two-fold, to quote from [110,
p. 160]:
The system either provides knowledge and explanations necessary for the user to carry
out his or her task, or alternatively, the system carries out some action and then explains
the need and reason for the action the system itself has taken to the user.
Borrowing from [13, p. 85, our emphasis], we stipulate what an explainable AI system entails:
Given an audience, an explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence is one that produces details or
reasons to make its functioning clear or easy to understand.
5Though the literature on computational measures of explainability in ML is expanding, see e.g. [37, 149].
6 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
In other words, an explainable AI system has to ﬁrst produce details and reasons underlying its
functioning – call this an explanation . It is then upon the explainee (i.e. the recipient or user of the
explanation, also called the audience) to take in the explanation. Thus, we are interested in the purpose
of an explanation (see e.g. [149, 158, 176, 194]) from the explainee point-of-view:
“What will I (i.e. the agent, human or artiﬁcial) do with the explanation?”
We do not attempt a representative list of the purposes of explanations, but nevertheless give some
examples. For instance, an expert in the domain in which an AI system is applied may want to do any
one of the following:
a) Understand how the system functions in general, in mundane situations, whence they expect
explanations to pertain to certain known aspects of the domain;
b) Learn how the system outputs aspects of the domain that are unexpected to the expert;
c) Conﬁrm and compare the system’s behavior in both expected and unexpected situations;
d) Act on the produced knowledge, whence they expect guidance towards desirable results.
Different purposes of explanations are well reﬂected by what are called XAI design goals in
[149], that amount to “identifying the purpose for explanation and choosing what to explain for the
targeted end-user and dedicated application.” See also e.g. [158, 194] for purposes of, particularly,
human-centric explanations in AI. Note, however, that we do not limit ourselves to human users of
AI systems. Instead, we allow AI (or otherwise intelligent machine) agents themselves to require
explanations from AI systems. Considering the progress in developing intelligent machines and au-
tonomous systems, it seems natural to foresee situations where an AI agent probes another for e.g. a
justiﬁcation of the latter’s (intended) actions in order to achieve or negotiate common goals.
We do acknowledge that the intended purpose is part of the explanation’s context, among other
factors such as the explainer, the explainee and the communication medium [194]. The context, specif-
ically the explainee, may inform or correlate with the purpose of explanations, especially in cases of
human audiences [13, 149, 198, 214]. But that need not generally be the case: if the explainees are
people, then it is “people’s goals or intended uses of the technology, rather than their social role”
[214] that shape the explainability desiderata. Note that there can be both AI-to-human and AI-to-AI
explainability, but we consider the purpose of explanations, rather than the nature of the explainee, to
be primary.
Finally, we recognize that various usability desiderata [189], including actionability (see e.g. [59,
123, 189]), are key to the purpose of explainability. We thus maintain that irrespective of the purpose
of explanations, for the explainee to consume and act upon, i.e. “to do something with” an explanation,
the explanation has to answer some question(s) about the AI system and its functioning . We discuss
next how explanations in MR (and potentially in AI at large) can be categorized according to the
questions they aim to answer.
7 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
2.2 High-level Questions
Intuitively, answering what -,why-,when -,how-types of questions about an AI system’s functioning
falls under the purview of explainability [81, 137, 149, 155]. At a high-level, we are interested in the
following questions:
Q1 Given a representation of the problem and given a query, e.g. a decision taken or an observation,
what are the reasons underlying the inference pertaining to the query?
Q2 Given a representation of the problem and its solution or an answer to a query, why is something
else not a solution or an answer?
Q3 Given different information or query, e.g. a different decision or observation, would the solu-
tion/answer change too, and how? (Purely based on explanation, without recomputing!)
Q4 Given a representation of the problem and its current solution, and given a representation of a
desired outcome, what decisions or actions can be taken to improve the current solution and to
achieve an outcome as close as possible to the desired one?
These questions need not be limited to MR, but may well apply to e.g. ML too.
Questions of type Q1 pertain to inputs to the system (see e.g. [137, p. 14]), deﬁnitions and meaning
of internal representations (see e.g. [155, p. 387], [128, p. 110], [32, p. 164]) and attribution of those
to the outputs (see e.g. [149]). Such questions aim at soliciting “insight about the information that is
utilized and the rules, processes or steps that are used by the system to reach the recommendation or
the outcome it has generated for a particular case.”[93, p.1483] Answers to Q1 type of questions thus
“inform users of the current (or previous) system state” and how the system “derived its output value
from the current (or previous) input values”[137, p. 14].
Questions of type Q2 and Q3 pertain to reasons against the current outcome and in favor of alter-
native outcomes as well as to alternative inputs and parameters (see e.g. [32, 81, 128, 137, 149, 155]).
Such questions solicit characterization of “the reasons for differences between a model prediction and
the user’s expected outcome.”[149] Answers to Q2 and Q3 types of questions thus “inform users why
an alternative output value was not produced given the current input values” and “could provide users
with enough information to achieve the alternative output value”[32, p. 167].
Questions of type Q4 pertain to changes to inputs, modelling or the problem itself that would
lead to user-desired outputs (see e.g. [137, 149]). Such questions aim at soliciting “hypothetical ad-
justments to the input or model that would result in a different output”[149]. Answers to Q4 type of
questions thus provide guidelines that help the user to achieve a (more) desired outcome.
We next propose a loose categorization of explanations in MR (and potentially AI at large) that
places explanations in families of types of explanations aiming to answer the high-level questions.
8 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
2.3 Categorization for Explanations
The driving factors of our categorization are the questions that explanations speciﬁcally in various
MR approaches aim to answer. Building on other works that aim at classiﬁcations/categorizations of
explanations, see [93, 100, 110, 123, 128, 137, 144, 149, 151, 152, 169, 177, 189, 207], we distinguish
three families/types of explanations: attributive (e.g. logical inference attribution, feature importance
association), contrastive (e.g. reasons con as well as pro, counterfactuals), actionable (e.g. guidelines
towards a desired outcome, realizable actions). We characterize these families of explanations using
the following notions.6
Abstractly, we assume at hand
an AI system Sthat given information iyields outcome o.
For instance, in some forms of MR, the system can be instantiated by a knowledge base KBconsisting
of background knowledge, that given information (e.g. a query) irepresented in symbolic form entails
(for some variant of formally deﬁned entailment j=) inferenceo:
KB[figj=o
In some forms of ML, the role of the system can be taken by a model or function f:X!Y(trained
on some set X0Xof data), that given instance i2Xassigns to it a label o2Y:
f(i) =o
The above are but examples of high-level descriptions of AI methodologies. They are nevertheless
helpful to ﬁnd intuitions behind the explanation categories suggested as follows.
2.3.1 Attributive Explanations
Attributive explanations (see e.g. [140, 144, 151]) rely on the notions such as trace, justiﬁcation,
attribution and association, widely used in MR and ML literature alike. At a high level, they aim to
answer the following question:
Q1 Given a representation of the problem and given a query, e.g. a decision taken or an observation,
what are the reasons underlying the inference pertaining to the query?
Or, using the notions above:
What are the details and reasons for system Syielding outcome o, given information i?
6Note that these are not formal deﬁnitions or descriptions. We believe that due to diversity of MR a formalization of
such terms would be incomplete, controversial and unhelpful, if not impractical or outright impossible. Instead, we use
natural language descriptions to practically convey our ideas and supply intuition.
9 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Attributive explanations justify oby attributing to/associating with o(parts of) Sandi. If applica-
ble, attributive explanations may contain a trace of such attribution/association. In MR, for instance,
using the above notation, an attributive explanation for ogivenican be
KB0KBsuch that KB0[figj=o
Normally, if applicable, such KB0would be required to be minimal (for some form of minimality, e.g.
subset inclusion), consistent (for some notion of consistency or non-contradiction) and informative (or
non-trivial), see e.g. [73] for formalization in logical terms. As a trace, KB0can contain e.g. inference
rules, proof or some sort of argument for ogiveni. In the case of ML, an attributive explanation can
be some minimal part ^iof instanceithat sufﬁces for fto yieldo(irrespective of the rest of i), see e.g.
[105] for examples of such explanations for ML classiﬁcations, formalized as well in logical terms.
In another form, for instance in planning, an attributive explanation could exhibit (the relevant part
of) the model of the problem or the state the model is in, given i, together with relational or causal
links too.
Attributive explanations are easy to design and are therefore commonplace [93, p.1483]. They are
prevalent in all MR branches we consider in this report, perhaps most prominently in Classical Logic-
Based Reasoning (Section 3.1). That they are prominent among classical-logic based approaches to
explainability is not surprising because, as we have seen, explainability started with early AI systems
which were largely based on classical logics. That attributive explanations are prevalent in all MR
approaches to explainability is not surprising either, because attribution can be seen to be necessary
for building the more advanced contrastive and actionable explanations (see e.g. [149]).
2.3.2 Contrastive Explanations
Contrastive explanations (see e.g. [110, 120, 144, 149, 188, 191]) pertain to the notions such as
criticism, contrast, counterfactual and dialogue. At a high level, they aim to answer the following
questions:
Q2 Given a representation of the problem and its solution or an answer to a query, why is something
else not a solution or an answer?
Q3 Given different information or query, e.g. a different decision or observation, would the solu-
tion/answer change too, and how? (Purely based on explanation, without recomputing!)
In other words:
What are the details and reasons of system Syielding outcome orather than different
outcomeo0, given information i?
And supposing that the given information is not i(but some different i0), wouldo0be the
outcome?
10 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Contrastive explanations address potential criticisms of the yielded outcome ogiven information iby
dealing with contrastive outcomes o0and information i0.
On the one hand, in addition to an attributive explanation as to why Syieldsogiveni, contrastive
explanations can provide counterexamples attributing to (parts of) Sandiwhyo0is not possible. For
instance, consider a classical logic-based setting where background knowledge KBis queried with i,
expecting a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ outcome o2fy;ng(regarding e.g. provability of ifromKB). Ifo=n, then
a contrastive explanation as a counterexample to the alternative outcome o0=ycould be a model M
in which KB[f:ighold true. In forms of ML, a contrastive explanation as a counterexample can be
some minimal part ^iof instanceithat prevents ffrom yielding o(irrespective of the rest of iwithout
^i). In, say, planning, a contrastive explanation as a counterexample can be some part of the model that
together with the given information makes some goal unachievable.
On the other hand, contrastive explanations can work via counterfactuals, see e.g. [33, 90, 203].
Taken plainly, a “counterfactual is a statement such as, ‘if p, thenq,’ where the premise pis either
known or expected to be false.”[90, p. 35] In contrast to attributive explanations and counterexamples,
“counterfactuals continue functioning in an end-to-end integrated approach”[203, p. 850], indicating
consequences of changing the given information. So counterfactual contrastive explanations are about
making or imagining different choices and analyzing what could happen or could have happened. Of-
ten, counterfactual contrastive explanations address changes with respect to more desirable outcomes
than the one yielded by the AI system [33, 90, 203].
In our terms, where iis information at hand, a counterfactual invites one to consider what happens
if different (and thus currently false) information i0were at hand, speculating that it may lead to a
different, perhaps more desirable, outcome o0. In more conventional MR terms then, a contrastive
explanation as a counterfactual can for instance be a
modiﬁcation i0ofisuch that KB[fi0gj=o0
Taken together with the system Syielding outcome ogiven information i, this expresses that ‘if i0
rather thaniwas given, then o0rather thanowould be the outcome’.
Note though that it may be that no such modiﬁcation is achievable or desirable, perhaps due to
restrictions placed by the underlying application. However, if it is, then it may be reasonable to strive
for some minimal modiﬁcation i0that is in some sense most similar to i. In addition, an attributive
explanation could be incorporated by, for instance, exhibiting some minimal KB0KBsuch that
KB0[fi0gj=o0, so that the counterfactual explanation indicates some minimal modiﬁcation of the
given information which together with some background knowledge sufﬁces to yield a more desirable
outcome. Similarly, in ML terms, if at least part ^iof instanceineeds to be changed for fto yieldo0
instead ofo, then a contrastive explanation as a counterfactual can be some minimal modiﬁcation i0
ofi(if it exists) that necessitates fto yieldo0. In planning, a given difﬁcult goal can be reduced to
11 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
a sub-goal by considering counterfactual “if only thus-and-so were true, I would be able to solve the
original problem” as a contrastive explanation, which then entails “arranging for thus-and-so to be
true”[90, p. 36], if possible.
Another variant of contrastive explanations in MR takes form in graph-like representations of
pros and cons of reasoning outcomes. Explanations of this type amount to deﬁning a formal structure,
which can usually be represented as a graph, that consists of information KB0KBmost relevant
for yielding the outcome ogiveni, together with relationships among KB0[fi;ogrevealing infor-
mation dependencies and/or which information is in favor or against o. Such graph-like explanations
are popular in Answer Set Programming (ASP), where they can be comprised of the (positive and
negative) literals and rules considered in deriving the answer oto the query ifrom a logic program
KB, see Section 3.2.3. They are also prevalent in Argumentation, where graphs capture the relevant
supporting and conﬂicting information from KB[figthat allows to contrast the justiﬁcations of, and
counterexamples to o. Such graph-based explanations provide basis for dialogical explanations that
formalize criticism and defense of the yielded outcome. Just as counterfactual explanations, dialogical
ones allow the explainee to be engaged, rather than simply presented, with explanations.
Contrastive explanations of these and similar various forms appear in Constraint Programming
(CP), Automated Theorem Proving (ATP) and Proof Assistants, forms of abductive reasoning, An-
swer Set Programming (ASP), Argumentation, Planning. They are non-trivial to deﬁne and design,
given the usually numerous contrastive situations, alternative answers and solutions. Overall, con-
trastive explanations, especially counterfactual and dialogical ones, are strongly related to actionable
explanations, in that contrastive explanations can support provision of actions and guidelines follow-
ing which the AI system will yield a desired outcome.
2.3.3 Actionable Explanations
We maintain that actionable explanations (see e.g. [59, 123, 189]) should be interventional, interac-
tive, collaborative, pedagogic. At a high level, they aim to answer the following question:
Q4 Given a representation of the problem and its current solution, and given a representation of a
desired outcome, what decisions or actions can be taken to improve the current solution and to
achieve an outcome as close as possible to the desired one?
In other words:
What can be done in order for system Sto yield outcome o, given information i?
Actionable explanations address potential interventions that may yield a desired outcome o, given
information i. They entail both interaction and collaboration between the system and its user in that
actionable explanations guide or teach the user on what actions/changes can be taken/made and the
user may choose to follow them or not to. Importantly, actionable explanations allow to take actions or
12 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
make changes that alter the system and possibly the problem themselves. For instance, in MR terms,
an actionable explanation can be a
modiﬁcation KB0ofKBsuch that KB0[figj=o
As with contrastive explanations, it would obviously be normal to require some minimality of the
modiﬁcation KB0and its similarity to KB(note that minimality may be a complicated aspect espe-
cially with respect to non-monotonic entailment). Additionally, an actionable explanation can supply
a modiﬁcation i0ofisuch that KB0[fi0gj=o, similarly to a counterfactual contrastive explanation.
In forms of ML, an actionable explanation can be some designation of the model’s fparameter
changes that result in a modiﬁed model f0such thatf0(i) =o. (This can be achieved e.g. by directly
modifying the weights, or the classiﬁcation thresholds or even the training set, see e.g. [123] for
examples of such actionable explanations for Naive Bayes Classiﬁers). In planning or scheduling, an
actionable explanation can be some minimal change of goals or resources (i.e. modiﬁcation of the
problem and hence the solver’s model) that are needed to attain a (solvable problem and its) solution
satisfying as much as possible the initial goals and constraints.
Actionable explanations also apply to the situations where the world itself changes (i.e. not nec-
essarily as a consequence of the user’s actions) and the previous outcomes/solutions are no longer
good or do not exist at all, so that explanations provide guidance in order to obtain new or better
outcomes/solutions. For instance, the background knowledge KBor the input space Xof the model
fmay change and the previous queries or inferences become invalid, whence actionable explanations
answer why and how to react. Ideally, actionable explanations would enable a meaningful interaction
between an AI system and its user (again, human or machine, indifferently) leading to a fruitful collab-
oration. Such an interaction could be for instance conversational, formalized as dialogue between the
user and the system, see e.g. [18, 51, 57, 101, 110, 121, 128, 144, 146, 150, 151, 186, 188, 190, 204].
Perhaps due to their inherent complexity of taking into account arguably more consequential
changes as well as attributions and contrasts, actionable explanations are not very prominent in MR.
We believe that they exist perhaps to a limited extent in e.g. Argumentation.
3 MR Branches and Explanations
We here overview branches of MR where explainability is studied. We do not claim to deﬁne what
counts as MR but offer our perspective. We think that assignment to MR of some approaches, par-
ticularly those falling into Classical Logic-Based Reasoning, Non-classical Logic-Based Reasoning
(Logic Programming) and Argumentation, will not be controversial. We likewise feel that Decision
Theory and Planning belong well to MR too. However, we admit that Multi-Agent Systems and
Causal Approaches can be regarded as more interdisciplinary branches, but we maintain to consider
13 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
approaches within the realm of MR. Finally, Reinforcement Learning is traditionally an area within
ML, but there are some approaches (that we focus on) that use MR techniques (as understood in this
report) for explainability.
3.1 Classical Logic-Based Reasoning
Arguably the most well established and far-back dating MR explainability techniques rest on classical
logic-based derivation/deduction. Falappa et al. outline well in [73] the notion of explanation used in
logic-based reasoning formalisms as follows. An explanation for a sentence ais a minimal, consistent
and informative set Aof sentences deducing a(where minimality is with respect to subset inclusion
, consistency and deduction are formalized with respect the underlying logic and informativeness
requires the consequences of Ato not be properly included among the consequences of a):
A`a;
A0?;
B6`aforB(A;
Cn(A)*Cn(a):
At large, such logic-based explanations aim to answer the following kinds of questions:
What explains a given observation ( o)?
Which information logically entails a given inference ( o)?
Why is a given formula derived or not?
Why is a set of formulas a solution?
Since such and similar explanations in logic-based reasoning are generally non-unique, preferred
explanations are often selected using some speciﬁc ordering criteria [165] with various forms of mini-
mality (e.g. cardinality, depth of proof/inference) being a frequent choice. Different works apply these
logic-based explanation ideas for explainability in various settings, including the so-called Model Di-
agnosis (e.g. [60, 167, 175]), abductive reasoning (see Sections 3.1.5, 3.2.1) and non-classical logic-
based approaches such as Logic Programming (LP, see Section 3.2). In this section we review some
prominent MR explainability techniques from various classical logic-based approaches to reasoning.
3.1.1 Axiom Pinpointing
Axiom pinpointing [164] in description logics (which are decidable fragments of ﬁrst-order logic) is
a very good example of the well established logic-based explanation concepts still being very much
relevant in modern MR explainability. Axiom pinpointing amounts to ﬁnding axioms in a knowledge
base that entail or prevent a given consequence/query, whereby minimal such sets of axioms are taken
14 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
as justiﬁcations/explanations. Such explanations aim to answer the following question:
given a knowledge base KB(possibly inconsistent, with an inconsistency-tolerant semantics)
and a query Q(e.g. a Boolean conjunctive), why is Q(not) entailed by KB? [12, 19]
Works of [19, 39, 104, 114, 139] are examples of explaining knowledge base query answering where
explanations are deﬁned as (minimal) subsets entailing or contradicting a given query with respect to
a (consistent or inconsistent) knowledge base. Roughly then, in our terms, given a knowledge base
KB and queryi, an explanation for the outcome o2fy;ng(representing ‘yes’ for ‘entailed’ and
‘no’ for ‘not entailed’, respectively) is a -minimal KB0KBsuch that KB0j=i, ifo=y, and a
-minimal KB0KBsuch that KB0[figj=bot, ifo=n. Such explanations are attributive .
3.1.2 Constraint Programming (CP)
Constraint Programming (CP) [178] is a paradigm for solving combinatorial search problems, often
called Constraint Satisfaction Problems (CSPs). CSPs are represented in terms of decision variables
and constraints, usually in classical logic vocabulary, and solving them amounts to ﬁnding value
assignments to variables that satisfy all the constraints.7
Already in mid-90s it was understood that explanations in CP cannot simply amount to tracing of
solutions but need to be much more sophisticated. To quote from [82, p. 4860],
A natural approach to providing a richer explanation of a solution would be to ‘trace’ the
program’s solution process. However, constraint solvers generally employ search, and
tracing search tends not to provide a very satisfying explanation. For backtrack search: “I
tried this and then that and hit a dead end, so I tried the other instead”. Even worse, for
local search: “I kept getting better, but then I tried some other random thing”.
Apart from search, inference is a critical part of constraint solving and was used early for explain-
ability. For instance, in [192], a “trace of the inference, with some rudimentary natural language
processing, provided explanations for puzzles taken from newsstand puzzle booklets that were rea-
sonably similar to the answer explanations provided in the back of the booklets.”[82, p. 4860] Overall
in CP, “much of the work on explaining failure actually is focused on programs explaining interme-
diate failures to themselves in order to reach a solution more efﬁciently.”[82, p. 4860]. The questions
that explanations in CP aim to answer include the following.
Why is there a conﬂict between these parts of the system? [83]
Which constraints result into failure? [111]
Why does this parameter have to have this value? [83]
What are the next propagation steps? [65, 208]
Which choices should I relax in order to recover consistency? [7, 82]
7We note that it is also very natural to use LP (see Section 3.2) in solving CSPs.
15 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Which choices should I relax in order to render such a value available for such a variable?
[7, 82]
From which subsets of current choices did inconsistency follow? [7, 82]
Why is this value not available any longer for this variable? [7, 82]
We review below several approaches in CP to devising explanations that answer such questions.
In his seminal paper [111] from 2004, Junker proposed QuickXplain – a general purpose tech-
nique for explainability in constraint programming. In a general setting of constraints (including e.g.
CP, Satisﬁability (SAT) and Beyond, description logics), relaxations (resp. conﬂicts) are deﬁned as
sets of constraints for which (resp. no) solution exists. Conﬂicts thus explain solution failure, relax-
ations restore consistency. However, both are generally exponential to construct and present, whereas
a user may desire explanations pertaining to the most important constraints. Thus, preferred relax-
ations and preferred conﬂicts are deﬁned to be minimal with respect to lexicographic orderings (over
relaxations and conﬂicts) deﬁned using any total order over constraints. In practice, this amounts to
successively adding the most preferred constraints until they fail and then removing the least pre-
ferred constraints as long as that preserves failure. Explainability-wise, “preferred conﬂicts explain
why best elements cannot be added to preferred relaxations”.[111, p. 169]8Further, the described
“checking based methods for computing explanations work for any solver and do not require that the
solver identiﬁes its precise inferences.”[111, p. 172] In a more general CP setting [162] similar to
[111], O’Sullivan et al. propose representative explanations (and algorithms thereof) in which “every
constraint that can be satisﬁed is shown in a relaxation and every constraint that must be excluded is
shown in an exclusion set.”[162, p. 328]
Other works, notably alldifferent [65], produce explanations for improving solver strategies. The
motivation of Downing et al. is as follows [65, p. 116, emphasis original]:
Whenever a propagator changes a domain it must explain how the change occurred in
terms of literals, that is, each literal lthat is made true must be explained by a clause
L!lwhereLis a (set or) conjunction of literals. When the propagator causes failure
it must explain the failure as a nogood ,L!? , withLa conjunction of literals which
cannot hold simultaneously.
Roughly then, the propagator’s actions can be explained using cut-sets, where an explanation is ef-
fectively a logical constraint on (the values of) variables. Similar ideas using a lazy clause generation
solver for explaining propagation via constraints from which nogoods can be computed can be applied
to string edit distance constraints, e.g. in [208] Winter et al. use explanations that consist of literals
which logically entail the truth of a Boolean variable that encodes propagation of some variable’s
value.
8Effectively, such explanations can be seen as a form of Brewka’s preferred subtheories [29] in the language of con-
straints.
16 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
In [7] Amilhastre et al. provide “explanations for some user’s choices and ways to restore con-
sistency”, whereby “the user speciﬁes her requirements by interactively giving values to variables
or more generally by stating some unary constraints that restrict the possible values of the decision
variables.” The goal is to “provide the user with explanations of the conﬂicts” in terms of “(minimal)
inconsistent subsets of the current set of choices.” From a technical point-of-view, “in order to cir-
cumvent intractability from the practical side, [the] approach relies on a compilation of the original
problem into a data structure from which much better performances can be obtained”, speciﬁcally an
“automaton that represents the set of solutions of the CSP.”
O’Callaghan, O’Sullivan, and Freuder argue in [160] that “desirable is an explanation that is cor-
rective in the sense that it provides the basis for moving forward in the problem-solving process” and
formally deﬁne a corrective explanation intuitively as “a reassignment of a subset of the user’s unary
decision constraints that enables the user to assign at least one more variable”, providing as well an
algorithm for computing corrective explanations of minimal length.
Recently, there have also been works that consider a constraint solver assisting a human user in
solving some logical problem. For instance, in [21] Bogaerts et al. “the propagation of a constraint
solver through a sequence of small inference steps”. They use minimal unsatisﬁable sets of constraints
for generating explanations of the solver’s individual inference steps and the explanations can overall
be seen as proofs or traces of the solver’s working towards a solution.
Overall, explanations in CP can be roughly described as follows. Given a set KBof constraints,
withibeing the latest propagation, variable assignment or user added constraint(s), an explanation for
the latest inference o(variable value restriction, e.g. l=>orv2[1;3], or failure?) is a-minimal
KB0KBsuch that KB0[figj=o. This falls into the category of attributive explanations.
Instead, contrastive explanations that answer questions pertaining to indication of constraints
or variable values leading to inconsistencies and consistency restoration can be deﬁned as follows.
Given KB[figj=oand an alternative outcome o06=o, an explanation as a counterfactual can be
a modiﬁcation i0ofisuch that KB[fi0gj=o0. In particular, if the outcome o=?means thati
cannot be satisﬁed given KB(i.e.icannot be extended to a solution of the CSP) then an explanation
for an alternative outcome (i.e. where a solution can be found) is a minimal KB0KBsuch that
KB0[figj=?and a modiﬁcation i0ofisuch that KB[fi0g6j=?.
3.1.3 Satisﬁability (SAT) and Beyond
Solving Satisﬁability (SAT) problems [62] is a special case of CSP solving. Satisfying assignments
are also referred to as implicants .Prime implicants are then implicants of minimal size, in the sense
that they satisfy the formula using a minimal set of assigned variables. Prime implicants can thus
be seen as attributive explanations. Indeed, Ignatiev, Narodytska, and Marques-Silva exploit prime
implicants in [107] to deﬁne logical explanations and counterexamples with respect to ML model
17 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
classiﬁcations. Speciﬁcally, given a Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP)/Satisﬁability Mod-
ulo Theories (SMT) encoding of an ML model (exactly representing its behavior), an assignment to
variables corresponds to an input/instance, with each variable corresponding to a feature. A satis-
fying assignment, for an ML model in which the prediction has been ﬁxed, represents an instance
which maps to that prediction. For a given instance then, a corresponding prime implicant explains
the model’s prediction/inference.9
As with general CP, another challenge is that of explaining inconsistency or unsolvability. Given
an unsatisﬁable formula, modern SAT solvers are able to report a proof of its unsatisﬁability together
with its support, also known as (unsatisﬁable) core. A core is a subset of the original formula which is
itself unsatisﬁable. Although usually smaller than the original formula, a core might not yet be mini-
mal. Instead, Minimal Unsatisﬁable Subformulas (MUSes) are cores of minimal size, in the sense that
every subset of a MUS is satisﬁable. MUSes can thus be regarded as explanations of unsatisﬁability
[170] since they represent the culprits generating an inconsistency, and in fact sufﬁce to generate a
conﬂict in the formula, regardless of the rest. Multiple MUSes can exist in a formula and so multi-
ple explanations abound, giving rise to both attributive andcontrastive explanations, answering the
following questions.
Which information minimally entails a given inference?
Which information prevents a given logical expression to be satisﬁed?
Analysis of inconsistent formulas plays an important role in MR explainability, since many, if not
all, of the approaches for extracting classical logic-based explanations can be reduced to this problem.
In addition, MUSes are widely used as building blocks of explanations in other MR approaches, for
instance Planning (see e.g. [69, 70]), Argumentation (see e.g. [157]), Decision Theory (see e.g. [22]).
3.1.4 Automated Theorem Proving (ATP) and Proof Assistants
Automated Theorem Proving (ATP) is a procedure whereby a tool known as a “theorem prover” is
provided a proposition, and it returns ‘true’ or ‘false’ (or runs out of time). Theorem provers have
matured tremendously in recent years, and are now used in many settings, not only for arithmetic. In
general, SAT solvers, SMT solvers, and model checkers also fall under the ambit of theorem proving.
If a theorem prover returns ‘false’, it also generates a falsifying counterexample, as a contrastive
explanation to the user as to why the proposition does not hold. However, most theorem provers
provide no explanation for a proposition which is veriﬁed to be true [79, 195].
Proof assistants are special kinds of theorem provers (often called interactive theorem provers).
These are hybrid tools that automate the more routine aspects of building proofs while depending
on human guidance for more difﬁcult aspects. One can write a theory of one’s choice, and verify
9In the basence of logical representation, one can instead deﬁne prime implicant explanations for ML classiﬁcation
directly as minimal sets of features of an instance that sufﬁce to yield the classiﬁcation, see e.g. [185].
18 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
whether or not a proposition holds of this theory. Well known examples of general proof assistants
are Isabelle10, F*, Coq11etc. [16]. Specialized proof assistants exist as well, such as Tamarin for
security protocol veriﬁcation. The user can write any theory supported by a proof assistant and verify
a proposition in that theory, rather than being limited to some theory of the designer’s choice. Proof
assistants are being widely used for a variety of applications, including building veriﬁed compilers
[122] and veriﬁed implementations of processors [171].
However, a proof assistant might return a true/false answer, run out of time, or stop at a subgoal
that it does not “know” how to solve. In the last case, the user might need to write helper code and
expand the theory. In essence, proof assistants are interactive, that is, they often require more input
from the user to solve “difﬁcult” goals. If a proof assistant returns ‘true’, it generates a sequence of
steps that one can then use to replicate the proof by hand for better understanding. Some specialized
proof assistants generate counterexamples if the proposition is found to be ‘false’, but not all of them
do – Coq, for instance, would just show the user some pending goals which it cannot solve (and the
statements corresponding to these goals might themselves be false), or throw an error message to say
that the proposition cannot be proved true by some underlying decision procedure.
In sum, explanations from theorem provers aim at answering the following questions.
If a proposition is true, what is a (shortest/most readable) proof?
If a proposition is false, what is a counterexample?
The ﬁrst type of explanations are attributive , whereas the second are contrastive (as counterexam-
ples).
There are obviously open problems pertaining to explainability in ATP, to name a few. 1. Can a
theorem prover/proof assistant also be optimized to provide the “best” counterexample, according to
some measure? 2. Can non-interactive theorem provers also provide explanations/proof descriptions
for propositions that are veriﬁed to be true? What would these explanations look like? 3. If a (sub)goal
involves an unsolvable loop which leads to a timeout, can this be output as an explanation instead of
(or in addition to) timing out? Furthermore, currently the explanations generated by most theorem
provers and proof assistants are not very human-friendly. Some proofs/counterexamples generated
by some theorem provers can take hundreds of lines, making it difﬁcult for a human to use these to
understand the underlying (mal)functioning of the system. There is some work [85] along the lines
of designing provers which produce proofs that look like ones humans might write, but only for very
speciﬁc domains.
In terms of AI-to-AI or machine-to-machine explanations, one can consider the example of proof-
carrying code, where an application downloaded from an untrustworthy location comes with a proof
of its “correctness” for the host system to verify before installation. No human intervention is needed
in order to either generate the proof or to verify it. This can be considered an example of the general
10https://isabelle.in.tum.de/
11https://coq.inria.fr/
19 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
idea of an interactive proof system [92].
An interactive proof system models computation as the exchange of messages between two par-
ties: a prover and a veriﬁer. The prover has vast computational resources, but cannot be trusted, while
the trusted veriﬁer has bounded computation power. As the name suggests, the prover tries to prove
some statement to the veriﬁer. Interactive proofs often proceed in “rounds”, where the parties send
messages to each other based on previous messages they have received, till the veriﬁer is “convinced”
of the truth of the statement. One can also have one-round (often referred to as non-interactive) proofs
where the prover only needs to send one message to convince the veriﬁer of a true statement, and no
further rounds of interaction are necessary.
Interactive proof systems have two requirements: soundness and completeness. Essentially, sound-
ness claims that no prover – even a dishonest one – can convince the veriﬁer of a false statement.
Completeness says that for every true statement, there is a proof that the prover can produce to the
veriﬁer to convince it. The veriﬁer may choose to “probe” various parts of the proof sent by the
prover to convince itself of the verity of the statement. This is often done in an efﬁcient manner by
picking random bits and using them to identify which parts of the proof to inspect. Depending on
what the abilities of the prover and the veriﬁer are, one can get different classes of proofs. One can
get (slightly) different systems based on whether the random values chosen by the veriﬁer are made
public or kept private. If one assumes the existence of special objects like one-way functions, one can
construct “zero-knowledge proofs”, where the veriﬁer is convinced exactly of the intended statement,
but no further information about said statement is revealed. One can also have systems where multiple
provers can interact with the veriﬁer (but not with each other) to prove a statement.
Interactive proof systems can be seen as an excellent example of AI-to-AI explainability ap-
proaches that have existed for a long time. However, as previously noted, there are still plenty of
interesting open problems in this area.
3.1.5 Abduction
Abductive reasoning, e.g. [113, 118, 133], aims at explaining phenomena such as observations, ab-
normalities, anomalies, false predictions. The notion of an explanation follows closely that of ex-
planations in classical logic-based reasoning delineated above, but in addition allows for inventing,
i.e. abducing, additional knowledge. This abduced knowledge, possibly together with existing back-
ground knowledge, is seen as an explanation in that it allows to deduce a given phenomenon. Minimal
(in various forms) sets of abducibles as explanations can be used for explaining abductive reasoning
via causal knowledge graphs [200], or, as in e.g. [15, 107], for explaining ML model classiﬁcations by
logically encoding ML models and abducing minimal assignments representing feature attributions
that guarantee classiﬁcations.
Explanations via abducibles aim at answering the following kinds of questions.
20 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
What information would entail this observation? [118]
Why was the wrong belief or expectation formed? [133]
Abducibles as explanations are thus largely attributive : given background knowledge KB and a
(possibly hypothetical) inference o, the abducible knowledge abis an explanation for ojust in case
KB[fabg j=o. However, hints of contrastive and actionable explanations appear in abducibles
in that they indicate knowledge that, if present, would allow to achieve a hypothetical/alternative
outcome/inference.
3.2 Non-classical Logic-Based Reasoning (Logic Programming)
Logic Programming (LP, see e.g. [11, 119]) is both a knowledge representation formalism and com-
putational mechanism for non-classical, particularly non-monotonic, reasoning. Often, explainability
in LP is enabled by the declarative reading of rules in logic programs, which allows for attributive
explanations in terms of knowledge and rules that yield a speciﬁc inference. Further, if the knowledge
and rules carry immediate semantic meaning, then deductive inference paths or proof trees are read-
ily interpretable and can be translated into natural language, as e.g. in Rulelog [94, 95]. Still further,
contrastive explanations can be obtained by inspecting conﬂict resolution strategies.
In general, LP takes various forms, most notably abductive, inductive and answer set program-
ming, each with different computational procedures and different approaches to explainability. We
discuss some of these below.
3.2.1 Abductive Logic Programming (ALP)
Abductive Logic Programming (ALP) [71, 113] is a form of abductive reasoning expressed using
LP vocabulary. Abductive logic programs are used for knowledge representation and abductive proof
procedures for automated reasoning. Abductive proof procedures interleave backward and forward
reasoning and can be used for checking and enforcing properties of knowledge representation (via
queries or inputs to the program) as well as for agents to abduce and/or explain actions required to
check/enforce such properties.
Formally, given an abductive logic program P, an abductive explanation for an observation o
(conjunctive formula) is a pair (D;)consisting of a (possibly empty) set Dof abducibles and a
(possibly empty) variable substitution for the variables in osuch thatPtogether with abducibles
Dentailoand satisfy integrity constraints. Different notions of entailment and satisfaction can be
adopted, for example classical ﬁrst-order entailment P[Dj=oand consistency P[D6`?.
Intuitively, abductive explanations answer the following questions [113, 199]:
Why did this observation occur?
What explains this observation?
How to reach this goal/query?
21 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Accordingly, as in Section 3.1.5 Abduction, abductive explanations in ALP are attributive , with
ﬂavors of actionability: “explanations can be thought of as data to be actually added to the beliefs
of the agents and actions that, if successfully performed by the agents, would allow for the agents to
achieve the given objectives while taking into account the agents’ beliefs, prohibitions, obligations,
rules of behavior and so on, in the circumstances given by the current inputs.”[199, p. 100]
3.2.2 Inductive Logic Programming (ILP)
Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) [153] studies the inductive construction of logic programs from
examples and background knowledge. Brieﬂy, “given a set of positive examples, and a set of negative
examples, an ILP system constructs a logic program that entails all the positive examples but does
not entail any of the negative examples.”[72, p. 1] The set of induced rules, called hypotheses, pos-
sibly together with a proof trace, is viewed as an explanation of the examples in the context of the
background knowledge: given background knowledge KBand setsPandNof positive and negative
examples, respectively, a set Rof clauses (i.e. hypotheses) is an explanation for given examples just
in case KB[R`pfor allp2PandKB[R6`nfor alln2N. Hypotheses as explanations thus
aim to answer the following question:
What general hypothesis best explains the given speciﬁc examples/observations?
As such, explanations in ILP are closely related to explanations in ALP. The two LP techniques
can indeed be considered complementary [153], noting that “abduction is the process of explanation
– reasoning from effects to possible causes, whereas induction is the process of generalization –
reasoning from speciﬁc cases to general hypothesis.”[132, p. 205] Some recent works, e.g. [72, 145],
use integrated ILP and ML techniques to learn explanatory logic programs from non-symbolic data.
Overall, ILP explanations as hypotheses or proof paths are attributive in nature.
3.2.3 Answer Set Programming (ASP)
Fandinno and Schulz provide an excellent overview in [78] of explanations in Answer Set Program-
ming (ASP) [30, 136], which have been researched for some 25 years. There are two main families
of approaches, namely justiﬁcation and debugging. The respectively aim at answering these kind of
questions:
Why is a literal (not) contained in an answer set?
Why is an unexpected or no answer set computed?
Both families ﬁrst-and-foremost provide attributive explanations, albeit with different ﬂavors: justi-
ﬁcations can be inspired by, for instance, causal or argumentative reasoning; debugging can be based,
for instance, on reporting unsatisﬁed rules or unsatisﬁable cores. Both justiﬁcation and debugging
approaches may also supply contrastive explanations by including conﬂicting information and re-
vealing conﬂict resolution that takes place in reasoning. We brieﬂy summarize the main ideas below,
22 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
following [78].
Justiﬁcation approaches by and large concern consistent logic programs and provide “somewhat
minimal explanation as to why a literal in question belongs to an answer set”. Off-line justiﬁcations
[166] are graph structures describing the derivations of atoms’ truth values via program rules and can
be seen to provide traces of dependencies. Labelled Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA)-based
answer set justiﬁcations (LABAS) [180, 181] abstract away from intermediate rule applications and
focus on the literals occurring in rules used in the derivation and can be seen to provide traces via
(supporting and attacking) arguments (see Argumentation), thus exhibiting reasons pro and con the
inference in question.
In a similar vain, causal graph justiﬁcations [34] associate with each literal a set of causal justiﬁ-
cations that can be graphically depicted and can be seen as causal chain traces. Causal graph justiﬁ-
cations are inspired by why-not provenance [202], which itself provides non-graphical justiﬁcations
expressing modiﬁcations to the program that can change the truth value of the atom in question. (By
extension, justiﬁcations for the actual truth values do not imply any modiﬁcations.) These can be seen
to approach the realm of actionable explanations, though unlike causal graph justiﬁcations, why-not
provenance does not discriminate between productive causes and other counterfactual dependencies
(see e.g. [98, 99]).
Debugging approaches instead by and large concern inconsistent logic programs and provide ex-
planations as to why a set of literals is not an answer set. The spock system [28, 87] transforms a logic
program into a meta-(logic)program expressing conditions for e.g. rule applicability and whose an-
swer sets capture violations of the given candidate answer set of the original program in terms of rule
satisfaction, unsupported atoms or unfounded loops. The Ouroboros system [161] extends these ideas
to logic programs possibly with variables, tackling also the issue of multiple explanations by requiring
the user to specify an intended answer set. Instead, [64, 184] propose interactive debugging whereby
the user is queried for about speciﬁc atoms to produce the relevant explanations of inconsistencies.
The above summary shows the wealth of explainability techniques in ASP, but there are also works
that use ASP for explanations in other areas. For instance, in [35] Calegari et al. map decision trees
(DTs) into logic programs to explain DT predictions via natural language explanations generated from
logic program rules.
In another recent research direction [15], Bertossi uses ASP to generate contrastive explanations
for discrete, structured data classiﬁcation. Brieﬂy, there: a) causal explanations are sets of feature–
value pairs such that changing at least one value changes the classiﬁcation label; b) counterfactual
(value-)explanations are individual feature-value pairs such that changing the value changes the clas-
siﬁcation; c) actual (value-)explanations are individual feature-value pairs together with a set of fea-
ture-value pairs such that changing the value of the former does not sufﬁce to change the classiﬁcation,
but changing the values of both the former and the latter does. Actual and counterfactual explanations
can be assigned explanatory responsibility measure, which amounts to the inverted size of the small-
23 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
est set accompanying an actual explanation, with the explanatory responsibility of a counterfactual
explanation always being 1 (because it sufﬁces to ﬂip only that feature-value to change the classi-
ﬁcation). Overall, Bertossi proposes to encode the inputs-outputs of an ML classiﬁer into an ASP
program, together with predicates and constraints capturing interventions (i.e. feature-value ﬂipping)
to extract the various explanations deﬁned by computing answer sets.
3.3 Argumentation
“Computational Argumentation is a logical model of reasoning that has its origins in philosophy
and provides a means for organizing evidence for (or against) particular claims (or decisions).”[186,
p. 277] Moulin et al. review in [151] a large body of literature on MR explainability and argue for the
use of argumentation to support interactive and collaborative explanations of reasoning that take into
account the aspects of justiﬁcation as well as criticism of claims/decisions/solutions. Indeed, “[t]here
is a natural pairing between Explainable AI and Argumentation: the ﬁrst requires the need to ex-
plain decisions and the second provides a method for linking any decision to the evidence supporting
it.”[186, p. 277]
By and large, data and knowledge in argumentation formalisms can be represented using various
forms of directed graphs, whereby nodes represent arguments modelling individual pieces of infor-
mation and edges represent relationships among arguments (e.g. attacks for conﬂicting information,
supports for supporting information). Reasoning then amounts to ﬁnd the sets of “good” arguments,
for instance arguments acceptable under some semantics, i.e. a collection of formal criteria such as
not attacking each other and defending against all attackers. (See Figure 1 (i).)
A common approach to explaining decisions in argumentation, one which encompasses both jus-
tiﬁcation and criticism, essentially amounts to traversing (a part of) an argument graph to show the
attacking and defending arguments (together with their relationships) relevant to the decision, where
the decision essentially amounts to accepting (resp. rejecting) an argument as (resp. not) “good”. In
addition, one can speculate what kind of changes to the argument graph, such as additions or removals
of arguments or relationships, would result into different acceptance status(es) of the argument(s) in
question. Argumentative explanations thus aim to answer the following questions:
Given a set of arguments, why is a particular argument a“good”? [76]
What are the reasons (i.e. other arguments) for and against accepting a?
Can the given reasons for acceptance of abe contested?
Which arguments/relationships should be removed or added to accept argument a? [77, 179]
Intuitively, to explain acceptability of an argument x, “one would need to show how to defend xby
showing that for every argument ythat is put forward (moved) as an attacker of x, one must move
an argument zthat attacks y, and then subsequently show how any such zcan be reinstated against
attacks (in the same way that zreinstatesx). The arguments moved can thus be organised into a graph
24 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
a
b
cd
e
(i)P
O
P
O
Pa
b
c
d
ed
e
(ii)P:
O:
P:
O:
P:a
b
c
d
e (iii)
Figure 1: Adapted from [147, Fig. 6.3, p. 114]. (i) An AA graph with nodes as arguments, labelled
a;b;c;d;e , and directed edges as attacks. Arguments accepted (resp. rejected) under the grounded ex-
tension semantics [66] are colored green (resp. red). (ii) Grounded dispute tree between the proponent
Pand opponent O, for the topic argument a. The proponent can successfully defend the claimed ar-
gumentaagainst all the counterarguments. (iii) A dialogue explanation as to why ais accepted, to be
read thus: “ais objected only by b, but is in turn defended by c;cis objected only by d, but is defended
by the unobjectionable e”. The explanation reveals all the pros and cons relevant for acceptance of a.
of attacking arguments that constitutes an explanation as to why xis [acceptable]”[148, p. 109].
So, given a graph Grepresenting an argumentation framework and a query regarding a statement
(e.g. (the claim of) an argument) i, an explanation for the acceptance status oofiis a minimal (in
some sense) subgraph G0Gconsisting of arguments for and counterarguments against othat (fully
or partially) determine o. The subgraph G0can be turned into a formal dispute tree [67, 148] where
two ﬁctional players – proponent Pand opponent O– put forward arguments in favor (pro) and
against (con) a topic argument, see Figure 1 (ii). This can accompanied by dialogical explanation to
the effect of establishing oby using the arguments for (pros) to defend from the counterarguments
(cons), see Figure 1 (iii). Such explanations are contrastive and answer the ﬁrst two questions above.
Relatedly, an explanation can be a modiﬁcation G0of the original argument graph Gsuch that the
desired acceptance status oofiis achieved. Such explanations can be seen as actionable and answer
the last two questions above.
In practice, constructing argumentative explanations amounts to one or both of the following two
phases.
Extract a connected subgraph (e.g. a path, branch, cycle; possibly depth-, width- or otherwise
bounded) that consists of the relevant arguments and counterarguments together with their ac-
ceptability statuses, and potentially indicate arguments and/or relationships that if added and/or
removed would change the acceptability statuses. Examples include [58, 59, 75, 77, 115, 172,
180, 181, 183, 210, 212].
Construct a formal dialogue [168] or an argument game [143, 148] in “which participants
engage in structured, rule-guided, goal-oriented exchange [of arguments] according to spe-
ciﬁc protocols.”[186, p. 208] Such dialogue games underly argumentation-supported dialogi-
25 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
cal/conversational explanations [141, 186, 205, 206]. The “winning” arguments are determined
by argumentation semantics, so such dialogue games show how one player justiﬁes the decision
while the other criticizes it. Examples include [12, 50, 51, 55, 57, 67, 74, 76, 77, 148, 181].
These ideas are not limited to various argumentation formalisms. On the one hand, they can be
directly applied to reasoning formalisms that can be captured or reinterpreted in argumentative terms:
1. In [24] Booth et al. construct explanatory dialogues for logic programs using abstract argumen-
tation (AA, [66]).
2. In [180, 181] Schulz and Toni use correspondence between answer sets in Answer Set Pro-
gramming (ASP) and stable extensions in Assumption-Based Argumentation (ABA, [23, 56])
to explain why a literal is or is not contained in an answer set of a logic program. The idea
behind an explanation, or rather a justiﬁcation, “for a literal lis to ﬁnd the underlying literals,
necessary to derive l, as well as conﬂicts with other literals which inﬂuence whether or not lis
part of an answer set.”[180, p. 3]
3. In [86] Garc ´ıa and Simari deﬁne argumentative dialogical explanations for queries in Defeasible
Logic Programming (DeLP).
4. In [213] Zhong et al. map decision frameworks into ABA frameworks so that best decisions
in the former correspond to acceptable arguments in the latter, and use ABA dispute trees as
explanations.
5. In [74] Fan captures planning problems in ABA and extracts explanations pertaining to actions
and/or their preconditions and goals relevant to the (in)validity of a plan.
On the other hand, ideas based on argumentative and dialogical explanations can be applied to
explain reasoning in other ﬁelds:
6. In [183] ˇSeˇselja and Straßer extend AA frameworks with explanatory and incompatibility rela-
tions to deﬁne explanations as explanatory paths in conﬂict- and incompatibility-free preferred
extensions, applying this to scientiﬁc debates.
7. In [31] Briguez et al. propose an argumentation-supported recommender system using DeLP,
which allows to naturally extract explanations in terms of reasons for and against a recom-
mendation. Similarly, in [50, 172] the authors propose and evaluate empirically a gradual
argumentation-based recommender system where items and their aspects are captured via argu-
ments, gradual semantics is used to determine the recommendations and explanations amount
to argument subgraphs that are turned into natural language explanations.
8. In [12, 101] the authors use variants of dispute trees and argumentation dialogues for explaining
answers to queries in ontology-based knowledge bases.
9. In [197] Timmer et al. extract probabilistically supported arguments from a Bayesian network
to construct a support graph and, given a set of observations, build arguments from that support
graph. Such arguments can facilitate the correct interpretation and explanation of the evidence
modelled in Bayesian networks.
26 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
10. In [186] Sklar and Azhar illustrate argumentative natural language explanations arising from
argumentation dialogue games in a collaborative human-autonomous agent scenario.
11. In [49] Cocarascu et al. use machine learning (autoencoders) to populate case-based reasoning
(CBR)-inspired argumentation frameworks for data classiﬁcation/prediction. There, explana-
tions can be extracted in two equivalent ways: dialectical explanations as subgraphs with argu-
ments comprising relevant data instances with known labels that support and/or contrast with
the prediction; rule-based explanations as logic programming (LP) rules (with exceptions) com-
prised of features. Cocarascu et al. further such dialectical explanations in [51] to classiﬁcation
of categorical data, annotated images and text.
12. In [182] Sendi et al. extract probabilistic classiﬁcation rules from deep neural networks which
then constitute arguments explaining any given classiﬁcation.
13. In [57] ˇCyras et al. use CBR-inspired, AA-driven reasoning formalism to classify and explain
legislative data.
14. In [58] ˇCyras et al. use AA frameworks to capture schedules and their properties for deﬁning,
extracting and presenting [59] explanations in makespan scheduling.
Other forms of argumentation-enabled explainable reasoning have been proposed too: (i) In [52]
Collins et al. propose structured argumentation as a good candidate for representing causality and
forming as well as communicating explanations in the planning domain; (ii) in [173] Raymond et al.
propose an argumentation-based architecture for designing explainable human-agent systems for de-
conﬂiction environments.
3.4 Decision Theory
Decision theory gathers different domains such as Multi-Criteria Decision Making, Decision Making
under Uncertainty and Computational Social Choice (SC). “The typical decision problem studied in
decision theory consists in selecting one alternative among a set Xof candidate options, where the
alternatives are described by several dimensions. This selection is obtained by the construction of a
preference relation over X.”[125, p. 1411] The ﬁnal part of the decision process, i.e. explaining the
outcome of the decision model to the user, is by and large not readily supported by decision theory
models due to their complexity. It is nonetheless arguably as important as the recommendation of the
outcome itself (see e.g. [14, p. 152]) and attempts at answering the following kind of question (see
e.g. [22, 125]):
Can this recommendation (i.e. the chosen alternative) be justiﬁed under the given preference
proﬁle?
Explainability in decision theory has been researched in modern MR. On the one hand, forms
of Argumentation have been proposed for explainable decision making, see e.g. [5, 6, 212, 213].
Speciﬁcally, in [5, 6] the authors propose to use abstract argumentation with preferences for multiple
27 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
agents to argue about acceptable decisions. There, explainability is assumed to arise naturally from the
argumentative process, but is not speciﬁed at all. Instead, Zhong et al. map decision frameworks into
Assumption-Based Argumentation and use dispute trees (see Section 3.3) to generate explanations
as to why a decision is best, better than or as good as others. They also translate such contrastive
dialogical explanations into natural language and perform an empirical user study in a legal reasoning
setting to evaluate their approach. These works effectively deﬁne argumentation-supported decision
making procedures where explainability arises from the argumentative methods employed.
On the other hand, Labreuche in [125] provides solid theoretical foundations to produce expla-
nations for a range of decision-theoretic models via provision of arguments, but not using formal
argumentation. There, arguments, and therefore explanations, essentially are “based on the identiﬁca-
tion of the decisive criteria.”[125, p. 1415] They are thus attributive , supplying justiﬁcations in terms
of higher-level criteria that support the recommended decision.
Similar in spirit, Labreuche, Maudet, and Ouerdane in [127] consider the setting of qualitative
multi-criteria decision making with preferential information regarding the importance of the criteria
and preference rankings over different options (choices). They deﬁne explanations as collections of
factored preference statements (roughly of the form ‘on criteria I, optionois better than options P’)
that justify the choice of the weighted Condorcet winner. Such explanations pertain to the relevant
data (problem inputs) supporting a proof that the recommended decision/choice is the best one.
Some more recent works essentially apply to various settings the same conceptual idea that expla-
nations of decisions made pertain to important criteria or principles based on which the model makes
a decision. For instance, in [159] explaining amounts to identiﬁcation of decisive criteria as sets of
attributes that are most important for preferring one option over another. Nunes et al. thus propose
attributive explanations via several decision criteria in a quantitative multi-attribute decision making
setting. Belahcene et al. deal with incomplete preference speciﬁcations in [14] and thereby use prefer-
ence swaps to explain/justify decisions. Intuitively, their explanations transform a complex preference
statement (over many attributes) that needs to be understood by the user into a series of simpler pref-
erence statements (over few attributes). In [126], Labreuche and Fossier consider hierarchical models
of multi-criteria decision aiding. They use Shapley values to deﬁne axiomatic indices regarding the
inﬂuence of different criteria and provide attributive explanations pertaining to the importance of dif-
ferent criteria. In a setting where different audiences may adhere to different norms [22], Boixel and
Endriss explain the decision making outcome by presenting axioms (with respect to audience’s norms)
for which no voting rule would yield a different outcome. We deem such explanations pertaining to
the importance of decision-making criteria to be attributive .
28 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
3.5 Planning
Automated planning (or AI planning) is a class of decision making techniques that deals with com-
puting sequences of actions towards achieving a goal. The solution to a planning problem is found by
a planner, typically one based on heuristic search. Chakraborti et al. review in [44] the most recent
advances in explainable AI planning. They emphasize the importance of user modelling, or “persona”
of the explainee. Although their classiﬁcation is broad – in terms of end-user, algorithm designer and
model designer personas – it is clear that more granular models are possible. Their work reinforces
Miller’s view on the characteristics of effective explanations [144], namely that explanations should
be “social in being able to model the expectations of the explainee, selective in being able to select
explanations among several competing hypothesis, and contrastive in being able to differentiate prop-
erties of two competing hypothesis.”[44, p. 4805] Further, Chakraborti et al. also point to the use of
abstractions as a means to provide effective explanations. They go on to provide a useful categoriza-
tion of recent approaches to explanations in AI planning, based on whether explanations reveal the
working of an algorithm, details of the underlying model, or attempt to reconcile the differences be-
tween the user and system’s mental models. The kinds of questions that explanations in planning aim
to answer pertain to goodness of plans, alternative choices and unsolvability, and are as follows:
What changes (in the current state) would make this solvable? (I.e. making excuses.) [91]
What are possible reasons you could not compute a plan from your current state to the given
goal state? [91]
Why a plan fails to be a solution, which actions are invalid? [74]
Why fail and what (temporal) repercussions does the ﬁrst failure have? [201]
Why did the agent take action A(at that time) rather than action B(resp. earlier or later)? [38]
Why was a particular predicate (agent/object) involved in the plan? [38]
How good is a given plan from the point of view of the human observer (their computational
model)? [42]
To answer questions about unsolvability and failures, some approaches provide contrastive ex-
planations in terms of a part KB0of the model KB that together with the initial state iand the
desired goal(s) olead to unsolvability ?. For instance, Fan in [74] captures STRIP-like planning in
Assumption-Based Argumentation and extracts explanations pertaining to actions and/or their pre-
conditions and goals relevant to both validity and invalidity of a plan. The unsolvability of planning
tasks can also be explained to the user by pointing out unreachable but necessary goals in terms of
propositional ﬂuents, assuming appropriate abstractions of the user’s model of the problem, e.g. [193].
Similarly, pointing out actions executed in a faulty node and their propagations (subsequent failed ac-
tions and their relationships) can be used to deﬁne explanations in temporal multi-agent planning
[201]. Such explanations mostly work by attributing counterexamples to solvability in the current
system S. However, counterfactual contrastive explanations in terms of excuses – minimal, restrictive
29 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
changes to the initial state ithat would allow to reach the desired goal o– are also possible [91].
Regarding alternative courses of action, contrastive explanations can be supplied that pertain to
higher-level properties satisﬁed or not by the (current or alternative) plan. The general idea in answer-
ing questions about a given plan not satisfying some property pis to produce a new plan 0that does
satisfypand compare the two plans [69]. For instance, in [68] Eiﬂer et al. develop a means to qualify
how good or poor a plan is, beyond the obvious properties such as cost or plan length. Such plan-
property dependencies allow oversubscribed goals to be reasoned over, and explained by an agent.
Speciﬁcally, in [69] Eiﬂer et al. deﬁne explanations via plan-property entailment of soft goals so that
an answer to the question “why is a property (set of soft goals) not achieved?” amounts to exhibiting
other properties (sets of soft goals) that would not be achieved otherwise. In the speciﬁc case of goal
exclusions, explanations amount to -minimal unsolvable goal subsets. [70] is an extension of this
approach to plan properties formulated in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL).
Another prominent challenge in explaining planning that has recently attracted a fair amount of
research interest is that of model reconciliation [40, 41, 42, 43, 124], aiming to answer the last question
above. Here the assumption is that humans have a domain and task model that differs signiﬁcantly
from that used by the AI agent, and explanations suggest changes to the human’s model to reconcile
the differences between the two. The objective of model reconciliation is not to completely balance
the information asymmetry, but is selective to knowledge updates that can minimally cause human-
computed plans to match those computed by the system. Such explanations are contrastive too [44],
in that they contrast the models of the AI system and its user and aim to bring modiﬁcation to the latter
so as to convince the user of the goodness of the plan. Relatedly but orthogonally, Krarup et al. show
in [120] how user constraints can instead be added to the formal planning model so that contrastive
explanations as differences between the solutions to the initial and the new model can be extracted.
We note that model reconciliation is in some aspects closely related to plan/goal recognition [36].
Essentially, recognizing the AI agent’s goals may be seen as a prerequisite to providing rationale for
its behavior. And the other way round, recognizing the user’s plans and goals can serve as a means to
improve explanations.
3.6 Multi-Agent Systems
Explainability in AI-supported Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) (sometimes also called Distributed AI
[134]) concerns interactions among multiple intelligent agents so as to agree on and explain individual
actions/decisions. Roughly, the questions of interest can be posed as follows:
How were the user’s (and the interacting agents’) preferences taken into account when making
a decision?
What is the user’s satisfaction with the decision?
There are a few works in MR, speciﬁcally in Argumentation (see Section 3.3), that aim to address
30 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
at least the ﬁrst question above. On the one hand, in [5, 6] the authors propose to use abstract argu-
mentation with preferences for multiple agents to argue about acceptable decisions. Explainability is
assumed to arise naturally from the argumentative process, via relationships among arguments, given
preferences and argumentation semantics. On the other hand, Raymond et al. propose in [173] an
argumentation-based architecture for designing explainable human-agent systems for deconﬂiction
environments. There, agents exchange conﬂict-free sets of arguments/rules in a dialogue Dand an
explanation of some topic argument ais a setSof related-admissible arguments [76] that recursively
defenda. The approach focuses “on generating post-hoc explanations derived from the history of a
dialogueD”. These are examples of contrastive argumentative explanations in MAS settings.
However, more generally and with respect to the user’s satisfaction, Kraus et al. stipulate in [121]
that there has so far been little explainability in multi-agent environments. They claim explainability
in MAS is more challenging than in other settings because “in addition to identifying the technical
reasons that led to the decision, there is a need to convey the preferences of the agents that were
involved.” Murukannaiah, Ajmeri, Jonker, and Singh echo this concern in [154] from the points-of-
view of multi-agent ethics, fairness etc. Several recent works suggest ways to address the challenges.
At a high-level, in [46] Ciatto et al. propose to integrate symbolic and connectionist approaches via
a multi-agent system to achieve explainability. More speciﬁcally, Kraus et al. propose to use ML
for generating “personalized explanations that will maximize user satisfaction”, which necessitates
collecting “data about human satisfaction from decision-making when various types of explanations
are given in different contexts.”[121, pp. 13534-13535] Along similar lines, in [8] Amir et al. suggest
research directions for agent strategy summarization to complement explainability in MAS. It remains
to be seen what lines of research will be instigated by these recent calls to renew interest in MAS
explainability, and whether MR, for instance the argumentation-based approaches discussed above,
will play a signiﬁcant role.
3.7 Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently become visible as a promising solution for dealing with
the general problem of optimal decision and control of agents that interact with uncertain environ-
ments. Application areas range from telecommunication systems, trafﬁc control, autonomous driving,
robotics, economics and games. In the general setting, an RL agent is usually operating in an environ-
ment repetitively applying one of the possible available actions and receives a state observation and
a reward as feedback. The goal of the RL framework is to maximize the overall utility over a time
horizon. The choices of right actions are critical; while some actions exploit the existing knowledge,
some actions explore to how to increase the collected reward in future, at the cost of performing a
locally sub-optimal behavior.
Explaining control decisions produced by RL algorithms is crucial [2], since the rationale is often
31 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
obfuscated, and the outcome is difﬁcult to trust for two reasons: 1. lack of coverage in the exploration,
and 2. generalizability of the learned policies. Explainability in RL is complicated due to its real-time
nature, since control strategies develop over time, and are typically not evaluated over snapshots.
Several techniques for explanations are proposed in [2] such as Bayesian rule lists, function analysis,
Grammar-based decision trees, sensitivity analysis combined with temporal modeling using long-
short term memory networks, and explanation templates. Albeit such techniques are relevant as early
attempts towards explaining RL decisions, we do not review them in this paper since we do not think
they fall within MR. Instead we next brieﬂy discuss some approaches that use symbolic techniques
for explainability in RL.
Approaches in the literature that integrate the RL framework with explanations have been investi-
gated in [84, 112, 117]. In particular, the authors in [84] introduce a framework of instructions-based
behavior explanation in order to explain the future actions of RL agents. In this way, the agent can
reuse the instructions from the human which leads to faster convergence. In [112], the method of
reward decomposition is proposed in order to explain the actions taken by an RL agent. The idea is to
split the reward in semantically meaningful types such that such that the action of the RL agent can be
compared with reference to trade-offs between the rewards. The study in [117] deals with the general
framework of explaining the policies over Markov Decision Policies (MDP). Under the assumption
that the MDP is factored, a subset a minimum set of explanations that justify the actions of MDP is
proposed. We believe these type of justifying explanations are a form of attributive explanations.
There is recent work on contrastive explanations in RL too. Speciﬁcally, in [142] Madumal et al.
deﬁne causal and counterfactual explanations for MDP-based RL agents given their action inﬂuence
models (which extend structural causal models [163] with actions). Speciﬁcally, they deﬁne a (com-
plete) causal explanation for an action A “as the complete causal chain from A to any future reward
that it can receive”, with a minimal such explanation omitting intermediate nodes in such a chain,
leaving source and destination nodes only. Further, they deﬁne a (minimally complete) explanation as
the difference between the actual causal chain for the taken action A, and the counterfactual causal
chain for some other action B. They show experimentally with human users that their explanations
are subjectively good enough and help the users to better understand the RL agent’s actions. However,
the method requires a correct model of the world to be given upfront.
3.7.1 Constrained RL
State-of-the-art RL is associated with several challenges: guaranteed safety during exploration in
the real world is one of them, and intricacy of reward construction is another. Many recent works
introduced preliminary results on mitigating these challenges through formal methods [4, 108, 109,
135]. The most related ones to MR focus on shielding or constraining exploration in general or in
various speciﬁc contexts, presenting objectives in the form of a linear temporal logic (LTL) formula
32 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[4, 109]. Recent works also include the design of control policies using RL methods to ﬁnd policies
which guarantee the satisfaction of properties described in temporal logic [26, 108, 135].
3.7.2 Multi-Agent RL (MARL)
When it comes to Multi-Agent RL (MARL) frameworks, the main challenge to be addressed is the
dependency between the action and rewards of different agents in the environment [131, 211]. It is
natural when two or more agents are trying to optimize their local behavior over a horizon of time,
and conﬂicts might occur with respect to the team or global behavior of the agents. In such a setting,
different local optimal actions might lead to conﬂicting collaborative behavior. Thus, such scenarios
render the collaborative reward design challenging, and new algorithms should be designed in order
to address such problems. The MARL scenario imposes additional constraints and an efﬁcient way
to handle them is to use a symbolic framework by presenting the constraints in a more convenient
ways, such as logical description. Kazhdan, Shams, and Li `o in [116] provide such model extraction
techniques that enhance explainability of MARL frameworks.
3.8 Causal Approaches
Causal models (see e.g. [88, 128, 163]) are useful in guiding interventional decisions and analyzing
counterfactual hypothetical situations. Using causal models one can not only provide a decision but
also provide a basis for what-if analysis, thus providing explanations. Lacave and D ´ıez provide in
[128] a summary of the work done on explaining AI models where the models are causal, quite often
Bayesian networks. The authors distinguish three classes of explanations. 1. Explanation of evidence
– this is basically abduction where the explanation is ﬁnding most probably explanations of variables
not directly observable, based on the observed evidence variables. This can be seen as a form of
attributive explanations. 2. Explanation of the model – this is simply a description (graphically or
in text) the causal model. 3. Explanation of reasoning – here the objective is to explain the reasoning
process for the result obtained, for speciﬁc results not obtained, or for counterfactual reasoning. We
see these largely as contrastive explanations.
As regards the ﬁrst class, [88] can be seen as an early example. There, Geffner equates “being
caused” with “being explained”. In contrast to earlier explanation techniques that used logical deriva-
tions (roughly as antecedents of rules that explain the consequents), Geffner augments default theories
[174] with a causality/explanations operator Cwhich is used to deﬁne an order over classes of mod-
els of default theories in terms of explained abnormalities ( abpredicates). The kind of rule-based
attributive explanations therefore have an abductive ﬂavor. [156] is instead a modern MR example
to explaining causality. Nielsen et al. show that given a set of variables, the values of which an ex-
planation is sought after, it is possible to determine a set of other variables (explanatory variables)
33 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
which probabilistically explain the given set of observed variables. Some of these are possibly ob-
served while the others are not. Indeed this includes abducing some variables from others. The use
of a causal Bayesian network to trace these other variables is particularly interesting in the case of
causal explanations.
Nielsen et al. further show how to use the interventional distribution on a Causal Bayesian network
to compute a causal explanation, thus approaching the realm of contrastive explanations. Another
recent example of attributive explanations with a counterfactual ﬂavor is the work of [142] which
uses structural causal models to explain actions of RL agents. In principle, to support counterfactual
reasoning and thus contrastive explanations, one can use pure regression techniques factoring in time
to do some causal correlation For instance, in Granger-causal inferencing the idea is to use time
series data analysis and hypothesis testing to extract possible causal inﬂuences. However, much more
informative models are structural equation models (see e.g. [163]) and causal Bayesian networks (see
e.g. [103]).
Structural equation models allow speciﬁcation of equations that denote the effect of one variable
on the other. That is most helpful in doing interventional analysis. The model also supports a logic
with an algebra that allows counterfactual analysis. On the other hand, Bayesian networks allow
for probabilistic relations between variables and thus also enable interventional and counterfactual
analysis. The Structural Causal Model is possibly the most evolved and combines the beneﬁts of both
these models. The rich set of analytical tools that it comes with is described in [163].
Generally, Pearl argues in [163] that explainability and other obstacles “can be overcome using
causal modeling tools, in particular, causal diagrams and their associated logic.” Methods for creating
such causal models are therefore of great importance. The main challenge of these methods in prac-
tice, however, is learning the model from data. Very often expert input is used in conjunction with data
to build the models. Heckerman describes in [102] how it is possible to build Causal Bayesian Net-
works from data, under some assumptions. Causal Bayesian Networks can be extended to Bayesian
Decision Networks where the decision variables and the utility (optimization) variables are explicitly
identiﬁed and used for decision making. See e.g. [53] for a concise introduction to the area.
Overall, we contend that despite the progress with techniques for causality, we are still far from
formalizing and being able to explain other more nuanced interpretations of causality that humans are
familiar with. This is exempliﬁed by the works on ‘actual’ causality, e.g. [63], which illustrates with
simple examples the challenges or explainability using simple causal diagrams.
4 Remarks
We brieﬂy discuss a few aspects related to our categorization of explanations (Section 2.3) and its
relationship to MR approaches overviewed in this report.
34 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Causality We have discussed Causal Approaches loosely as a branch of MR where explainability
is investigated. Instead, causality can be viewed as a property or even constitute a category of expla-
nations, see e.g. [110]. However, following e.g. [144, 189, 207], we contend that explanations may,
but need not in general be causal. It is for instance acknowledged that “it does not seem possible to
develop a formal connection between counterfactuals and causality.”[90, p. 69] We thus maintain that
the aspect of causality is orthogonal to our categorization of explanations.
Hierarchy of explanation families We see the three categories of explanations forming a hierarchy
of increasing complexity in the following intuitive sense. Attributive explanations may act as compo-
nents of contrastive explanations (e.g. attributions pro and con), and contrastive explanations can pave
way for actionable explanations (e.g. contrasting outcomes lead to actions). This complexity also well
reﬂects the maturity of different types of explanations, with attributive ones being the oldest and most
pervasive, contrastive ones more recent and advanced, and actionable explanations arguably the most
challenging and least explored.
User-centrism In addition to the three families of explanations that we proposed, we recognize the
property of explanations being user-centric , see e.g. [40, 149, 150, 176, 207, 214]. While it clearly
applies to attributive, contrastive and actionable explanations, here we also have in mind a slightly
different, more general notion of user-centrism. Speciﬁcally, it pertains to approaches to explainability
directly taking into account the user (human or AI, indifferently) model, preferences, intentions etc. It
is not only about the explanations being e.g. accessible, comprehensible, informative, but also about
the relation between the explainee and the explanation. For instance, in the human user case,
1. an attributive explanation may need to take into account the relevance of the attributions to the
user, e.g. domain vs procedural knowledge in the inference from knowledge to outcome;
2. a contrastive explanation may need to take into account the context in terms of which counter-
factual situations are attainable to the user, e.g. the controllable aspects of the problem domain
such as resource availability;
3. an actionable explanation may need to take into account the user’s preferences over decisions,
e.g. costs of resources and actions.
User-centric explanations concern the system’s understanding of its user, and include aspects of
cooperation and adaptation. At a high level, they aim to answer the following question:
Given a representation of the problem and of the user, e.g. their preferences or mental model,
and given an object of interest (e.g. a query, a decision, a solution, a change, a desideratum),
how are the user and the object related?
The challenges with attaining such explanations (and hence the current scarcity of them, at least in
MR) have been brought forward in e.g. [44, 121, 194]. We hope that the developing landscape of MR
explainability may soon allow (and require) an overview of the user-centric aspects of explanations.
35 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Explanation desiderata In addition to such overarching properties as user-centrism and the cat-
egories of explanations suggested herein, explanations in AI can be studied and classiﬁed in terms
of the desiderata (or desirable properties) they fulﬁl. To appreciate the evolution of desiderata for
AI explainability over the previous decades we invite the reader to consult the following works:
[96, 100, 110, 123, 128, 137, 138, 189, 204]. We agree that a discussion of the various desiderata
would be complementary to our overview, but it is beyond the scope of this work. We believe that our
categorization works at a sufﬁciently high-level and is adequate for the purposes of this report.
Applicability of categories We speculate that our loose categorization of explanations in AI applies
to ML as well as to MR. For instance, post-hoc ML explanation techniques summarized in [13, p. 89,
Figure 4], are attributive, except for local explanations, which can also be seen as contrastive. It is
reasonable to expect our categories to be applicable to other XAI approaches, given that our work
builds on and borrows from recent XAI overviews. However, we by no means claim that our loose
categorization is exhaustive: there may obviously be types of explanations that are not covered by our
three families, e.g. explanations by example that are rather popular in ML (see e.g. [149]). We leave
it for future work to see how broadly our categorization applies to non-MR approaches.
5 Conclusions
In this report, we have provided a high-level conceptual overview of selected Machine Reasoning
(MR) approaches to explainability. We have summarised what we believe are the most relevant MR
contributions to Explainable AI (XAI), from early to modern MR research, perhaps with a stronger
focus on the more recent studies. We have discussed explainability in MR branches of Classical
Logic-Based Reasoning, Non-classical Logic-Based Reasoning (Logic Programming), Argumenta-
tion, Decision Theory and Planning as well as the related areas of Multi-Agent Systems, Reinforce-
ment Learning and Causal Approaches. In particular, we have seen that MR explainability approaches
are suited not only for explainable MR (i.e. explaining MR-based AI systems) but also for explain-
ability in other ﬁelds or areas of AI, such Machine Learning (ML).
We have loosely categorized the various kinds of explanations provided by MR approaches into
three families of explanations: attributive, contrastive and actionable. Attributive explanations give
details as to why an AI system yields a particular output given a particular input in terms of attribution
and association of the (parts of the) system and the input with the output. These type of explanations
have been studied since the very early MR and continue to be relevant and widely used in modern
MR as well as its approaches to XAI at large. Contrastive explanations give details as to why an AI
system yields one but not another output given some input in terms of reasons for and against different
outputs. This type of explanations has been advocated for in MR for a long time too and appears in
36 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
modern MR in the form of counterexamples, criticisms, counterfactuals and dialogues. Such and
similar forms of contrastive explanations are being actively explored in MR and its applications to
XAI. Finally, actionable explanations give details as to what can be done in order for an AI system
to yield a particular output given input in terms of actions available to the system’s user (human or
AI, indifferently). This kind of explanations should enable interventions to the system and eventually
an interactive collaboration between the user and the system so as to reach desirable outcomes. We
see actionable explanations as belonging to the frontier of MR explainability where novel research
approaches and directions are being proposed.
Our categorization of explanations is informed by the different types of questions about the AI
system’s workings which explanations seek to answer. We have indicated some of the questions ad-
dressed in the overviewed MR branches and summarized the higher-level questions. In answering the
latter, an explanation provides some details and reasons about the AI system and its functioning. This
pertains to what we believe are the main purposes of explanations in XAI, namely to enable the user
of an AI system to both understand the system and to do something with the explanation.
The main lesson in writing this report was perhaps the (re)discovery of the evolution of XAI
challenges and the wealth of MR approaches aiming to address those challenges. Importantly, we
want to stress that XAI research in MR is very much active to date, as seen from our overview
of modern MR explainability studies. Still, despite the advances over the years, challenges in MR
explainability abound and it seems that lessons from the past hold well today too [110, p. 161]:
If explanation provision is to become a characteristic feature of many future interfaces,
then there is a special responsibility for researchers in both HCI [human-computer inter-
action] and AI to provide input to the debate about the nature of the explanations to be
provided in future information systems. The onus on us as researchers in the area is to
ensure that we proﬁt by past research on explanation provision, identify the strengths and
weaknesses in present research and build on the strengths and address the problems in
the future.
We hope that this report will inform the XAI community about the progress in MR explainability and
its overlap with other areas of AI, thus contributing to the bigger picture of XAI.
37 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
References
[1] Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. Peeking Inside the Black-Box: A Survey on Explainable Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access , 6:52138–52160, 2018. ISSN 2169-3536. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2018.2870052. URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8466590/ .
[2] AK Agogino, Ritchie Lee, and Dimitra Giannakopoulou. Challenges of explaining real-time planning.
InICAPS Workshop on Explainable Planning (XAIP) , 2019.
[3] Emanuele Albini, Antonio Rago, Pietro Baroni, and Francesca Toni. Relation-Based Counterfactual
Explanations for Bayesian Network Classiﬁers. In Christian Bessiere, editor, 29th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 451–457, Yokohama, 2020. IJCAI. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/
63.
[4] Mohammed Alshiekh, Roderick Bloem, R ¨udiger Ehlers, Bettina K ¨onighofer, Scott Niekum, and
Ufuk Topcu. Safe Reinforcement Learning via Shielding. In Sheila A McIlraith and Kilian Q
Weinberger, editors, 32nd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 2669–2678, New Or-
leans, Louisiana, 2018. AAAI Press. URL https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/
AAAI18/paper/view/17211 .
[5] Leila Amgoud and Henri Prade. Using Arguments for Making and Explaining Decisions. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , (3-4):413–436, 2009. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2008.11.006.
[6] Leila Amgoud and Mathieu Serrurier. Agents that Argue and Explain Classiﬁcations. Au-
tonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , 16(2):187–209, 2008. ISSN 13872532. doi: 10.1007/
s10458-007-9025-6.
[7] J ´erˆome Amilhastre, H ´el`ene Fargier, and Pierre Marquis. Consistency Restoration and Explanations in
Dynamic CSPs - Application to Conﬁguration. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 135(1-2):199–234, 2002. ISSN
00043702. doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(01)00162-X.
[8] Ofra Amir, Finale Doshi-Velez, and David Sarne. Summarizing Agent Strategies. Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , 33(5):628–644, sep 2019. ISSN 1387-2532. doi: 10.1007/
s10458-019-09418-w. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-019-09418-whttp://
link.springer.com/10.1007/s10458-019-09418-w .
[9] Robert Andrews, Joachim Diederich, and Alan B Tickle. Survey and Critique of Techniques for Ex-
tracting Rules from Trained Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. Knowledge-Based Systems , 8(6):373–389, dec
1995. ISSN 09507051. doi: 10.1016/0950-7051(96)81920-4.
[10] Sule Anjomshoae, Davide Calvaresi, Amro Najjar, and Kary Fr ¨amling. Explainable Agents and Robots:
Results from a Systematic Literature Review. In Noa Agmon, Edith Elkind, Matthew E. Taylor, and
Manuela Veloso, editors, 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems ,
pages 1078–1088, Montreal, 2019. IFAAMAS.
[11] Krzysztof R Apt and Roland N Bol. Logic Programming and Negation: A Survey. The Journal of Logic
Programming , 19/20:9–71, 1994. ISSN 07431066. doi: 10.1016/0743-1066(94)90024-8.
[12] Abdallah Arioua, Nouredine Tamani, and Madalina Croitoru. Query Answering Explanation in In-
consistent Datalog +/- Knowledge Bases. In Qiming Chen, Abdelkader Hameurlain, Farouk Toumani,
Roland Wagner, and Hendrik Decker, editors, Database and Expert Systems Applications - 26th Interna-
tional Conference , volume 9261 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 203–219, Valencia, 2015.
38 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22849-5 15. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-319-22849-5{_}15 .
[13] Alejandro Barredo Arrieta, Natalia D ´ıaz-Rodr ´ıguez, Javier Del Ser, Adrien Bennetot, Siham Tabik, Al-
berto Barbado, Salvador Garcia, Sergio Gil-Lopez, Daniel Molina, Richard Benjamins, Raja Chatila, and
Francisco Herrera. Explainable Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, Taxonomies, Op-
portunities and Challenges Toward Responsible AI. Information Fusion , 58(December 2019):82–115,
2020. ISSN 15662535. doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2019.12.012.
[14] K. Belahcene, C. Labreuche, N. Maudet, V . Mousseau, and W. Ouerdane. Explaining Robust Additive
Utility Models by Sequences of Preference Swaps. Theory and Decision , 82(2):151–183, feb 2017. ISSN
0040-5833. doi: 10.1007/s11238-016-9560-1. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
s11238-016-9560-1 .
[15] Leopoldo Bertossi. An ASP-Based Approach to Counterfactual Explanations for Classiﬁcation. In 4th
International Joint Conference on Rules and Reasoning , 2020.
[16] Yves Bertot and Pierre Cast ´eran. Interactive Theorem Proving and Program Development - Coq’Art:
The Calculus of Inductive Constructions . Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. An EATCS Series.
Springer, 2004. ISBN 978-3-642-05880-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-07964-5. URL https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-662-07964-5 .
[17] Floris Bex. An Integrated Theory of Causal Stories and Evidential Arguments. 15th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law , pages 13–22, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2746090.2746094.
[18] Floris Bex and Douglas Walton. Combining Explanation and Argumentation in Dialogue. Argument &
Computation , 7(1):55–68, 2016. doi: 10.3233/AAC-160001.
[19] Meghyn Bienvenu, Camille Bourgaux, and Franc ¸ois Goasdou ´e. Computing and Explaining Query An-
swers over Inconsistent DL-Lite Knowledge Bases. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 64:563–
644, mar 2019. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.1.11395. URL https://jair.org/index.
php/jair/article/view/11395 .
[20] Or Biran and Courtenay Cotton. Explanation and Justiﬁcation in Machine Learning: A Survey. In 1st
Workshop on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 8–13, 2017.
[21] Bart Bogaerts, Emilio Gamba, Jens Claes, and Tias Guns. Step-Wise Expla-
nations of Constraint Satisfaction Problems. In 24th European Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2020. URL https://freuder.wordpress.com/
pthg-19-the-third-workshop-on-progress-towards-the-holy-grail/ .
[22] Arthur Boixel and Ulle Endriss. Automated Justiﬁcation of Collective Decisions via Constraint Solving.
In Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, Gita Sukthankar, Bo An, and Neil Yorke-Smith, editors, 19th Inter-
national Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 168–176, Auckland, 2020.
IFAAMAS. doi: abs/10.5555/3398761.3398786.
[23] Andrei Bondarenko, Phan Minh Dung, Robert Kowalski, and Francesca Toni. An Abstract,
Argumentation-Theoretic Approach to Default Reasoning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 93(97):63–101, 1997.
doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00015-5.
39 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[24] Richard Booth, Dov M Gabbay, Souhila Kaci, Tjitze Rienstra, and Leendert van der Torre. Abduc-
tion and Dialogical Proof in Argumentation and Logic Programming. In Torsten Schaub, Gerhard
Friedrich, and Barry O’Sullivan, editors, 21st European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume
263 of Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications , pages 117–122, Prague, 2014. IOS Press.
ISBN 9781614994190. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-419-0-117.
[25] L ´eon Bottou. From Machine Learning to Machine Reasoning: An Essay. Machine Learning , 94(2):
133–149, 2014. ISSN 08856125. doi: 10.1007/s10994-013-5335-x.
[26] Maxime Bouton, Jesper Karlsson, Alireza Nakhaei, Kikuo Fujimura, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Jana
Tumova. Reinforcement Learning with Probabilistic Guarantees for Autonomous Driving. CoRR ,
abs/1904.0, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.07189 .
[27] Ronald J Brachman and Hector J Levesque. Knowledge Representation and Reasoning . Elsevier, 2004.
ISBN 978-1-55860-932-7.
[28] Martin Brain and Marina De V os. Answer Set Programming: A Domain in Need of Explanation - A
Position Paper. In Thomas Roth-Berghofer, Stefan Schulz, David B Leake, and Daniel Bahls, editors,
3rd International and ECAI-08 Workshop on Explanation-Aware Computing , pages 37–48, Patras, 2008.
[29] Gerhard Brewka. Preferred Subtheories: An Extended Logical Framework for Default Reasoning. In
N S Sridharan, editor, 11th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1043–1048,
Detroit, 1989. Morgan Kaufmann.
[30] Gerhard Brewka, Thomas Eiter, and Mirosław Truszczy ´nski. Answer Set Programming at a Glance.
Communications of the ACM , 54(12):92–103, dec 2011. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/2043174.
2043195. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2043174.2043195 .
[31] Cristian E. Briguez, Maximiliano C.D. Bud ´an, Cristhian A.D. Deagustini, Ana G. Maguitman, Marcela
Capobianco, and Guillermo R. Simari. Argument-based Mixed Recommenders and their Application to
Movie Suggestion. Expert Systems with Applications , 41(14):6467–6482, oct 2014. ISSN 09574174.
doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2014.03.046. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.03.
046https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0957417414001845 .
[32] Adrian Bussone, Simone Stumpf, and Dympna O’Sullivan. The Role of Explanations on Trust and
Reliance in Clinical Decision Support Systems. In Prabhakaran Balakrishnan, Jaideep Srivatsava, Wai-
Tat Fu, Sanda M Harabagiu, and Fei Wang, editors, International Conference on Healthcare Informatics ,
pages 160–169, Dallas, 2015. IEEE. ISBN 9781467395489. doi: 10.1109/ICHI.2015.26.
[33] Ruth M. J. Byrne. Counterfactuals in Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): Evidence from Human
Reasoning. In Sarit Kraus, editor, 28th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
6276–6282, Macao, aug 2019. IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-9992411-4-1. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/876. URL
https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2019/876 .
[34] Pedro Cabalar, Jorge Fandinno, and Michael Fink. Causal Graph Justiﬁcations of Logic Programs.
Theory and Practice of Logic Programming , 14(4-5):603–618, jul 2014. ISSN 1471-0684. doi: 10.1017/
S1471068414000234. URL https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/
S1471068414000234/type/journal{_}article .
[35] Roberta Calegari, Giovanni Ciatto, Jason Dellaluce, and Andrea Omicini. Interpretable Narrative Expla-
nation for ML Predictors with LP: A Case Study for XAI. In Federico Bergenti and Stefania Monica,
40 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
editors, 20th Workshop ”From Objects to Agents” , volume 2404, pages 105–112, Parma, 2019. CEUR-
WS.org.
[36] Sandra Carberry. Techniques for Plan Recognition. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction , 11
(1-2):31–48, 2001. ISSN 09241868. doi: 10.1023/A:1011118925938.
[37] Diogo V . Carvalho, Eduardo M. Pereira, and Jaime S. Cardoso. Machine Learning Interpretability: A
Survey on Methods and Metrics. Electronics , 8(8):832, jul 2019. ISSN 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/
electronics8080832. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/8/8/832 .
[38] Michael Cashmore, Anna Collins, Benjamin Krarup, Senka Krivic, Daniele Magazzeni, and David
Smith. Towards Explainable AI Planning as a Service. In 2nd International Workshop on Explainable
AI Planning , Berkeley, CA, jul 2019. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=rkl-Nph79V .
[39] ˙Ismail ˙Ilkan Ceylan, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Enrico Malizia, and Andrius Vaicenavi ˇcius. Explanations
for Query Answers under Existential Rules. In Sarit Kraus, editor, 28th International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1639–1646, Macao, aug 2019. IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-9992411-4-1. doi:
10.24963/ijcai.2019/227. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2019/227 .
[40] Tathagata Chakraborti, Sarath Sreedharan, Yu Zhang, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Plan Explanations
as Model Reconciliation: Moving Beyond Explanation as Soliloquy. In Carles Sierra, editor, 26th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 156–163, Melbourne, aug 2017. IJCAI. ISBN
9780999241103. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2017/23. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/
2017/23 .
[41] Tathagata Chakraborti, Kshitij P. Fadnis, Kartik Talamadupula, Mishal Dholakia, Biplav Srivastava, Jef-
frey O. Kephart, and Rachel K.E. Bellamy. Planning and Visualization for a Smart Meeting Room
Assistant. AI Communications , 32(1):91–99, 2019. ISSN 09217126. doi: 10.3233/AIC-180609.
[42] Tathagata Chakraborti, Anagha Kulkarni, Sarath Sreedharan, David E. Smith, and Subbarao Kamb-
hampati. Explicability? Legibility? Predictability? Transparency? Privacy? Security? The Emerging
Landscape of Interpretable Agent Behavior. In J. Benton Srivastava, Nir Lipovetzky, Eva Onaindia,
David E. Smith, and Siddharth Srivastava, editors, 29th International Conference on Automated Plan-
ning and Scheduling , pages 86–96. AAAI Press, 2019. URL https://aaai.org/ojs/index.
php/ICAPS/article/view/3463 .
[43] Tathagata Chakraborti, Sarath Sreedharan, Sachin Grover, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Plan Ex-
planations as Model Reconciliation. An Empirical Study. In 14th ACM/IEEE International Con-
ference on Human-Robot Interaction , pages 258–266. IEEE, 2019. ISBN 9781538685556. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01013 .
[44] Tathagata Chakraborti, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. The Emerging Landscape of
Explainable Automated Planning & Decision Making. In Christian Bessiere, editor, 29th International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 4803–4811, Yokohama, 2020. IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-
9992411-6-5. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/669. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/
2020/669 .
[45] Martin Chapman, Panagiotis Balatsoukas, Mark Ashworth, Vasa Curcin, Nadin K ¨okciyan, Kai Essers,
Isabel Sassoon, Sanjay Modgil, Simon Parsons, and Elizabeth I Sklar. Computational Argumentation-
based Clinical Decision Support Demonstration. In Noa Agmon, Edith Elkind, Matthew E. Tay-
lor, and Manuela Veloso, editors, 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiA-
41 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
gent Systems , pages 2345–2347, Montreal, 2019. IFAAMAS. URL http://www.ifaamas.org/
Proceedings/aamas2019/pdfs/p2345.pdf .
[46] Giovanni Ciatto, Roberta Calegari, Andrea Omicini, and Davide Calvaresi. Towards XMAS: eXplain-
ability through Multi-Agent Systems. In Claudio Savaglio, Giancarlo Fortino, Giovanni Ciatto, and
Andrea Omicini, editors, 1st Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Internet of Things , pages 40–53,
Rende, 2019. CEUR-WS.org.
[47] Gabriele Ciravegna, Francesco Giannini, Marco Gori, Marco Maggini, and Stefano Melacci. Human-
Driven FOL Explanations of Deep Learning. In Christian Bessiere, editor, 29th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 2234–2240. IJCAI, 2020. ISBN 978-0-9992411-6-5. doi:
10.24963/ijcai.2020/309. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2020/309 .
[48] Gabriele Ciravegna, Francesco Giannini, Stefano Melacci, Marco Maggini, and Marco Gori. A
Constraint-Based Approach to Learning and Explanation. In 34th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence , volume 34, pages 3658–3665. AAAI Press, 2020. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i04.5774. URL
https://aaai.org/ojs/index.php/AAAI/article/view/5774 .
[49] Oana Cocarascu, Kristijonas ˇCyras, and Francesca Toni. Explanatory Predictions with Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks and Argumentation. In Dawid W. Aha, Trevor Darrell, Patrick Doherty, and Daniele Maga-
zzeni, editors, 2nd Workshop on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Stockholm, 2018.
[50] Oana Cocarascu, Antonio Rago, and Francesca Toni. Extracting Dialogical Explanations for Review
Aggregations with Argumentative Dialogical Agents. In Edith Elkind, Manuela Veloso, Noa Agmon,
and Matthew E. Taylor, editors, 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems , pages 1261–1269, Montreal, 2019. IFAAMAS. ISBN 9781510892002.
[51] Oana Cocarascu, Andria Stylianou, Kristijona ˇs Cyras, and Francesca Toni. Data-Empowered Argumen-
tation for Dialectically Explainable Predictions. In 24th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
Santiago de Compostela, 2020. IOS Press.
[52] Anna Collins, Daniele Magazzeni, and Simon Parsons. Towards an Argumentation-Based Approach to
Explainable Planning. In Tathagata Chakraborti, Dustin Dannenhauer, Joerg Hoffmann, and Daniele
Magazzeni, editors, 2nd ICAPS Workshop on Explainable Planning , Berkeley, CA, 2019.
[53] Anthony C. Constantinou and Norman Fenton. Things to Know about Bayesian Networks: Decisions
Under Uncertainty, Part 2. Signiﬁcance , 15(2):19–23, apr 2018. ISSN 17409705. doi: 10.1111/
j.1740-9713.2018.01126.x. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1740-9713.2018.
01126.x .
[54] Mark G. Core, H. C. Lane, Michael Van Lent, Dave Gomboc, Steve Solomon, and Milton Rosenberg.
Building Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems. In 21st National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AAAI) , volume 2, pages 1766–1773, Boston, 2006. AAAI Press. ISBN 1577352815. URL
http://www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/2006/aaai06-293.php .
[55] Kristijonas ˇCyras, Ken Satoh, and Francesca Toni. Explanation for Case-Based Reasoning via Abstract
Argumentation. In 6th International Conference on Computational Models of Argument , pages 243–254,
Potsdam, 2016. IOS Press.
[56] Kristijonas ˇCyras, Xiuyi Fan, Claudia Schulz, and Francesca Toni. Assumption-Based Argumentation:
Disputes, Explanations, Preferences. In Pietro Baroni, Dov M Gabbay, Massimiliano Giacomin, and
42 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
Leendert van der Torre, editors, Handbook Of Formal Argumentation , volume 1, pages 365–408. College
Publications, 2018. ISBN 9781848902756.
[57] Kristijonas ˇCyras, David Birch, Yike Guo, Francesca Toni, Rajvinder Dulay, Sally Turvey, Daniel Green-
berg, and Tharindi Hapuarachchi. Explanations by Arbitrated Argumentative Dispute. Expert Sys-
tems with Applications , 127:141–156, 2019. ISSN 09574174. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2019.03.012. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0957417419301654 .
[58] Kristijonas ˇCyras, Dimitrios Letsios, Ruth Misener, and Francesca Toni. Argumentation for Explainable
Scheduling. In 33rd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 2752–2759, Honolulu,
Hawaii, 2019. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33012752. URL http://www.aaai.org/
ojs/index.php/AAAI/article/view/4126 .
[59] Kristijonas ˇCyras, Amin Karamlou, Myles Lee, Dimitrios Letsios, Ruth Misener, and Francesca Toni.
AI-assisted Schedule Explainer for Nurse Rostering. In Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, Gita Sukthankar,
Bo An, and Neil Yorke-Smith, editors, 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul-
tiAgent Systems - Demo Track , pages 2101–2103, Auckland, 2020. IFAAMAS.
[60] A. Darwiche. Model-Based Diagnosis using Structured System Descriptions. Journal of Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence Research , 8:165–222, jun 1998. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.462. URL
https://jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/10206 .
[61] Ernest Davis. Logical Formalizations of Commonsense Reasoning: A Survey. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research , 59:651–723, 2017. doi: 10.1613/jair.5339.
[62] Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam. A Computing Procedure for Quantiﬁcation Theory. Journal of the
ACM , 7(3):201–215, jul 1960. ISSN 0004-5411. doi: 10.1145/321033.321034. URL http://dl.
acm.org/doi/10.1145/321033.321034 .
[63] Marc Denecker, Bart Bogaerts, and Joost Vennekens. Explaining Actual Causation in Terms
of Possible Causal Processes. In Francesco Calimeri, Nicola Leone, and Marco Manna, ed-
itors, Logics in Artiﬁcial Intelligence - 16th European Conference , volume 1, pages 214–
230, Rende, 2019. Springer. ISBN 9783030195694. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-19570-0
14. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19570-0{_}14http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-19570-0{_}14 .
[64] Carmine Dodaro, Philip Gasteiger, Kristian Reale, Francesco Ricca, and Konstantin Schekoti-
hin. Debugging Non-ground ASP Programs: Technique and Graphical Tools. Theory and
Practice of Logic Programming , 19(2):290–316, 2019. ISSN 1471-0684. doi: 10.1017/
S1471068418000492. URL https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/
S1471068418000492/type/journal{_}article .
[65] Nicholas Downing, Thibaut Feydy, and Peter J. Stuckey. Explaining alldifferent. In Mark Reynolds
and Bruce H. Thomas, editors, 25th Australasian Computer Science Conference , volume 122, pages
115–124, Melbourne, 2012. Australian Computer Society. ISBN 978-1-921770-03-6.
[66] Phan Minh Dung. On the Acceptability of Arguments and Its Fundamental Role in Nonmonotonic
Reasoning, Logic Programming and n-person Games. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 77(2):321–357, 1995. doi:
10.1016/0004-3702(94)00041-X.
43 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[67] Phan Minh Dung, Robert Kowalski, and Francesca Toni. Dialectic Proof Procedures for Assumption-
Based, Admissible Argumentation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 170(2):114–159, 2006. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.
2005.07.002.
[68] Rebecca Eiﬂer, Michael Cashmore, J ¨org Hoffmann, Daniele Magazzeni, and Marcel Steinmetz. Ex-
plaining the Space of Plans through Plan-Property Dependencies. In 2nd International Workshop on
Explainable AI Planning , Berkeley, CA, 2019.
[69] Rebecca Eiﬂer, Michael Cashmore, J ¨org Hoffmann, Daniele Magazzeni, and Marcel Steinmetz. A New
Approach to Plan-Space Explanation: Analyzing Plan-Property Dependencies in Oversubscription Plan-
ning. In 34th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 9818–9826, New York, NY ,
2020. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i06.6534. URL https://aaai.org/ojs/index.php/
AAAI/article/view/6534 .
[70] Rebecca Eiﬂer, Marcel Steinmetz, ´Alvaro Torralba, and J ¨org Hoffmann. Plan-Space Explanation via
Plan-Property Dependencies: Faster Algorithms & More Powerful Properties. In Christian Bessiere, ed-
itor,29th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 4091–4097, Yokohama, 2020.
IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-9992411-6-5. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/566. URL https://www.ijcai.org/
proceedings/2020/566 .
[71] Kave Eshghi and Robert Kowalski. Abduction Compared with Negation by Failure. In Giorgio Levi
and Maurizio Martelli, editors, Logic Programming, the 6th International Conference , number 3, pages
234–254, Lisbon, 1989. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-62065-0.
[72] Richard Evans and Edward Grefenstette. Learning Explanatory Rules from Noisy Data. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 61:1–64, jan 2018. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/jair.5714. URL
https://jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/11172 .
[73] Marcelo A. Falappa, Gabriele Kern-Isberner, and Guillermo R. Simari. Explanations, Belief Revision
and Defeasible Reasoning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 141(1-2):1–28, 2002. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/
S0004-3702(02)00258-8.
[74] Xiuyi Fan. On Generating Explainable Plans with Assumption-Based Argumentation. In Tim Miller,
Nir Oren, Yuko Sakurai, Itsuki Noda, Bastin Tony Roy Savarimuthu, and Tran Cao Son, editors, 21th
International Conference on Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems , pages 344–361, Cham,
2018. Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-03098-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-03098-8 21.
[75] Xiuyi Fan and Francesca Toni. A General Framework for Sound Assumption-Based Argumentation
Dialogues. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 216:20–54, 2014. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2014.06.001.
[76] Xiuyi Fan and Francesca Toni. On Computing Explanations in Argumentation. In Blai Bonet and Sven
Koenig, editors, 29th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1496–1502, Austin, Texas, 2015.
AAAI Press. ISBN 978-1-57735-698-1.
[77] Xiuyi Fan and Francesca Toni. On Computing Explanations for Non-Acceptable Arguments. In Eliz-
abeth Black, Sanjay Modgil, and Nir Oren, editors, Theory and Applications of Formal Argumentation
- 3rd International Workshop , volume 9524 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 112–127,
Buenos Aires, 2015. Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-28460-6 7.
[78] Jorge Fandinno and Claudia Schulz. Answering the “Why” in Answer Set Programming - A Survey
of Explanation Approaches. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming , 19(2):114–203, 2019. ISSN
14753081. doi: 10.1017/S1471068418000534.
44 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[79] Melvin Fitting. First-Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving, Second Edition . Graduate
Texts in Computer Science. Springer, 2 edition, 1996. ISBN 978-1-4612-7515-2. doi: 10.1007/
978-1-4612-2360-3. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-2360-3 .
[80] John Fox. Cognitive Systems at the Point of Care: The CREDO Program. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics , 68:83–95, apr 2017. ISSN 15320464. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.02.
008. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2017.02.008https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1532046417300333 .
[81] Maria Fox, Derek Long, and Daniele Magazzeni. Explainable Planning. In Dawid W Aha, Trevor
Darrell, Michael Pazzani, Darryn Reid, Claude Sammut, and Peter Stone, editors, 1st Workshop on Ex-
plainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Melbourne, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.10256 .
[82] Eugene C. Freuder. Explaining Ourselves: Human-Aware Constraint Reasoning. In Satinder P. Singh
and Shaul Markovitch, editors, 31st AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 4858–4862, San
Francisco, CA, 2017. AAAI Press.
[83] Eugene C. Freuder, Chavalit Likitvivatanavong, Manuela Moretti, Francesca Rossi, and Richard J.
Wallace. Computing Explanations and Implications in Preference-Based Conﬁgurators. In Barry
O’Sullivan, editor, Recent Advances in Constraints, Joint ERCIM/CologNet International Workshop
on Constraint Solving and Constraint Logic Programming , volume 2627, pages 76–92, Cork, 2002.
Springer. ISBN 9783540366072. doi: 10.1007/3-540-36607-5 6. URL http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/3-540-36607-5{_}6 .
[84] Yosuke Fukuchi, Masahiko Osawa, Hiroshi Yamakawa, and Michita Imai. Autonomous self-explanation
of behavior for interactive reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the 5th International Con-
ference on Human Agent Interaction , pages 97–101, 2017.
[85] M. Ganesalingam and W. T. Gowers. A fully automatic theorem prover with human-style output. Journal
of Automated Reasoning , 58(2):253–291, 2017.
[86] Alejandro Javier Garc ´ıa and Guillermo Ricardo Simari. Defeasible Logic Programming: DeLP-servers,
Contextual Queries, and Explanations for Answers. Argument & Computation , 5(1):63–88, 2014. doi:
10.1080/19462166.2013.869767.
[87] Martin Gebser, J ¨org P ¨uhrer, Torsten Schaub, and Hans Tompits. A Meta-Programming Technique for
Debugging Answer-Set Programs. In Dieter Fox and Carla P Gomes, editors, 23rd AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 448–453, Chicago, Illinois, 2008. AAAI. URL http://www.aaai.
org/Library/AAAI/2008/aaai08-071.php .
[88] Hector Geffner. Causal Theories for Nonmonotonic Reasoning. In Howard E Shrobe, Thomas G Diet-
terich, and William R Swartout, editors, 8th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 524–
530, Boston, 1990. AAAI Press/MIT Press.
[89] Hector Geffner. Model-free, Model-based, and General Intelligence. In J ´erˆome Lang, editor, 27th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 10–17, Stockholm, 2018. IJCAI. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.02308 .
[90] Matthew L. Ginsberg. Counterfactuals. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 30(1):35–79, 1986. ISSN 00043702. doi:
10.1016/0004-3702(86)90067-6.
45 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[91] Moritz G ¨obelbecker, Thomas Keller, Patrick Eyerich, Michael Brenner, and Bernhard Nebel. Coming
Up With Good Excuses: What to do When no Plan Can be Found. In Ronen I Brafman, Hector Geffner,
J¨org Hoffmann, and Henry A Kautz, editors, 20th International Conference on Automated Planning
and Scheduling , pages 81–88, Toronto, 2010. AAAI. URL http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.
php/ICAPS/ICAPS10/paper/view/1453 .
[92] Shaﬁ Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, and Charles Rackoff. The Knowledge Complexity of Interactive Proof-
systems. In Oded Goldreich, editor, Providing Sound Foundations for Cryptography: On the Work of
Shaﬁ Goldwasser and Silvio Micali , pages 203–225. ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3335741.3335750. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3335741.3335750 .
[93] M. Sinan G ¨on¨ul, Dilek ¨Onkal, and Michael Lawrence. The Effects of Structural Characteristics of Expla-
nations on Use of a DSS. Decision Support Systems , 42(3):1481–1493, dec 2006. ISSN 01679236. doi:
10.1016/j.dss.2005.12.003. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0167923605001806 .
[94] Benjamin Grosof, Michael Kifer, Paul Fodor, and Janine Bloomﬁeld. Rulelog: Highly Expressive, Yet
Scalable, Semantic Rules. Technical report, Kyndi, Coherent Knowledge, Stony Brook University, 2018.
[95] Benjamin N Grosof, Michael Kifer, and Paul Fodor. Rulelog: Highly Expressive Semantic Rules with
Scalable Deep Reasoning. In Nick Bassiliades, Antonis Bikakis, Stefania Costantini, Enrico Franconi,
Adrian Giurca, Roman Kontchakov, Theodore Patkos, Fariba Sadri, and William Van Woensel, editors,
RuleML+RR: International Joint Conference on Rules and Reasoning , London, 2017. CEUR-WS.org.
URLhttp://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1875/paper18.pdf .
[96] Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pe-
dreschi. A Survey of Methods for Explaining Black Box Models. ACM Computing Surveys , 51(5):1–42,
aug 2019. ISSN 03600300. doi: 10.1145/3236009. URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
doid=3271482.3236009 .
[97] Mark Hall, Daniel Harborne, Richard Tomsett, Vedran Galetic, Santiago Quintana-Amate, Alistair Not-
tle, and Alun Preece. A Systematic Method to Understand Requirements for Explainable AI (XAI)
Systems. In Tim Miller, Rosina Weber, and Daniele Magazzeni, editors, 3rd Workshop on Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 21–27, Macao, 2019.
[98] Ned Hall. Two Concepts of Causation. In John Collins, Ned Hall, and Laurie Paul, editors, Causation
and Counterfactuals , pages 225–276. MIT Press, 2004.
[99] Ned Hall. Structural Equations and Causation. Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for
Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition , 132(1):109–136, 2007. ISSN 00318116, 15730883. URL http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/25471849 .
[100] Lars Kai Hansen and Laura Rieger. Interpretability in Intelligent Systems – A New Concept? In
Wojciech Samek, Gr ´egoire Montavon, Andrea Vedaldi, Lars Kai Hansen, and Klaus-Robert M ¨uller,
editors, Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 11700, pages 41–49. Springer, 2019. ISBN
9783030289539. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-28954-6 3. URL http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-030-28954-6{_}3 .
[101] Abdelraouf Hecham, Abdallah Arioua, Gem Stapleton, and Madalina Croitoru. An Empirical Evaluation
of Argumentation in Explaining Inconsistency-Tolerant Query Answering. In Alessandro Artale, Birte
Glimm, and Roman Kontchakov, editors, 30th International Workshop on Description Logics , Montpel-
lier, 2017. CEUR-WS.org.
46 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[102] David Heckerman. A Bayesian Approach to Learning Causal Networks. In Philippe
Besnard and Steve Hanks, editors, 11th Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence , pages 285–295, Montreal, 1995. Morgan Kaufmann. URL https://dslpitt.
org/uai/displayArticleDetails.jsp?mmnu=1{&}smnu=2{&}article{_}id=
444{&}proceeding{_}id=11 .
[103] Christopher Hitchcock. Causal Models. In Edward N Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, summer 202 edition, 2018. URL
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entries/causal-models/ .
[104] Matthew Horridge, Bijan Parsia, and Ulrike Sattler. Explaining Inconsistencies in OWL Ontolo-
gies. In Llu ´ıs Godo and Andrea Pugliese, editors, Scalable Uncertainty Management - 3rd In-
ternational Conference , volume 5785 LNAI, pages 124–137, Washington, 2009. Springer. ISBN
3642043879. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-04388-8 11. URL http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-642-04388-8{_}11 .
[105] Alexey Ignatiev. Towards Trustable Explainable AI. In Christian Bessiere, editor, 29th International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 5154–5158, Yokohama, 2020. IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-
9992411-6-5. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/726. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/
2020/726 .
[106] Alexey Ignatiev, Nina Narodytska, and Jo ˜ao Marques-Silva. Abduction-Based Explanations for Machine
Learning Models. In 33rd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 1511–1519,
Honolulu, Hawaii, 2019. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011511.
[107] Alexey Ignatiev, Nina Narodytska, and Joao Marques-Silva. On Relating Explanations and Adversarial
Examples. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence D’Alch ´e-Buc, Emily B.
Fox, and Roman Garnett, editors, 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 15857–15867, Vancouver, 2019.
[108] David Isele, Alireza Nakhaei, and Kikuo Fujimura. Safe Reinforcement Learning on Autonomous Vehi-
cles. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pages 1–6, Madrid, 2018.
IEEE. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2018.8593420. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2018.
8593420 .
[109] Nils Jansen, Bettina K ¨onighofer, Sebastian Junges, and Roderick Bloem. Shielded Decision-Making in
MDPs. CoRR , abs/1807.0, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.06096 .
[110] Hilary Johnson and Peter Johnson. Explanation Facilities and Interactive Systems. In Wayne D. Gray,
William E. Heﬂey, and Dianne Murray, editors, 1st International Workshop on Intelligent User Inter-
faces , pages 159–166, Orlando, 1993. ACM. ISBN 0897915569. doi: 10.1145/169891.169951. URL
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=169891.169951 .
[111] Ulrich Junker. QUICKXPLAIN: Preferred Explanations and Relaxations for Over-Constrained Prob-
lems. In Deborah L. McGuinness and George Ferguson, editors, 19th National Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , volume 3, pages 167–172, San Jose, CA, 2004. AAAI Press/MIT Press.
[112] Zoe Juozapaitis, Anurag Koul, Alan Fern, Martin Erwig, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Explainable rein-
forcement learning via reward decomposition. In IJCAI/ECAI Workshop on Explainable Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence , 2019.
47 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[113] Antonis C Kakas, Robert Kowalski, and Francesca Toni. Abductive Logic Programming. Journal of
Logic and Computation , 2(6):719–770, 1992. ISSN 0955-792X. doi: 10.1093/logcom/2.6.719.
[114] Aditya Kalyanpur, Bijan Parsia, Matthew Horridge, and Evren Sirin. Finding All Justiﬁcations of OWL
DL Entailments. In Karl Aberer, Key-Sun Choi, Natasha Fridman Noy, Dean Allemang, Kyung-Il
Lee, Lyndon J. B. Nixon, Jennifer Golbeck, Peter Mika, Diana Maynard, Riichiro Mizoguchi, Guus
Schreiber, and Philippe Cudr ´e-Mauroux, editors, The Semantic Web , volume 4825 LNCS, pages 267–
280, Busan, 2007. Springer. ISBN 3540762973. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-76298-0 20. URL http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-540-76298-0{_}20 .
[115] Amin Karamlou, Kristijonas ˇCyras, and Francesca Toni. Complexity Results and Algorithms for
Bipolar Argumentation. In Noa Agmon, Edith Elkind, Matthew E. Taylor, and Manuela Veloso, edi-
tors, 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 1713–1721,
Montreal, 2019. IFAAMAS. URL http://www.ifaamas.org/Proceedings/aamas2019/
pdfs/p1713.pdfhttp://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3331902 .
[116] Dmitry Kazhdan, Zohreh Shams, and Pietro Li `o. Marleme: A multi-agent reinforcement learning model
extraction library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07928 , 2020.
[117] Omar Zia Khan, Pascal Poupart, and James P Black. Minimal sufﬁcient explanations for factored markov
decision processes. In ICAPS . Citeseer, 2009.
[118] J ¨urg Kohlas, Dritan Berzati, and Rolf Haenni. Probabilistic Argumentation Systems and Abduction.
Annals of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 34(1-3):177–195, 2002. ISSN 10122443. doi: 10.
1023/A:1014482025714.
[119] Robert Kowalski. Logic Programming. In J ¨org H Siekmann, editor, Handbook of the His-
tory of Logic. Volume 9: Computational Logic , pages 523–569. Elsevier, 2014. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-444-51624-4.50012-5. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/B9780444516244500125 .
[120] Benjamin Krarup, Michael Cashmore, Daniele Magazzeni, and Tim Miller. Model-Based Contrastive
Explanations for Explainable Planning. In Tathagata Chakraborti, Dustin Dannenhauer, Joerg Hoffmann,
and Daniele Magazzeni, editors, ICAPS 2019 Workshop on Explainable AI Planning (XAIP) , pages 21–
29, Berkeley, 2019. URL https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/69957/ .
[121] Sarit Kraus, Amos Azaria, Jelena Fiosina, Maike Greve, Noam Hazon, Lutz Kolbe, Tim-Benjamin Lem-
bcke, J ¨org P. M ¨uller, S ¨oren Schleibaum, and Mark V ollrath. AI for Explaining Decisions in Multi-Agent
Environments. In 34th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 13534–13538, New York, NY ,
2020. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i09.7077.
[122] Robbert Krebbers, Xavier Leroy, and Freek Wiedijk. Formal C Semantics: CompCert and the C
Standard. In Gerwin Klein and Ruben Gamboa, editors, Interactive Theorem Proving - 5th In-
ternational Conference , volume 8558 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 543–548, Vi-
enna, 2014. Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-08970-6 36. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-08970-6{_}36 .
[123] Todd Kulesza, Margaret Burnett, Weng-keen Wong, and Simone Stumpf. Principles of Explanatory De-
bugging to Personalize Interactive Machine Learning. In Oliver Brdiczka, Polo Chau, Giuseppe Carenini,
Shimei Pan, and Per Ola Kristensson, editors, 20th International Conference on Intelligent User In-
terfaces , pages 126–137, Atlanta, GA, 2015. ACM. ISBN 9781450333061. doi: 10.1145/2678025.
2701399. URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2678025.2701399 .
48 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[124] Anagha Kulkarni, Satya Gautam Vadlamudi, Yantian Zha, Yu Zhang, Tathagata Chakraborti, and Sub-
barao Kambhampati. Explicable Planning as Minimizing Distance from Expected Behavior. In 18th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , volume 4, pages 2075–
2077, Montreal, 2019. IFAAMAS. ISBN 9781510892002. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/
10.5555/3306127.3332015 .
[125] Christophe Labreuche. A General Framework for Explaining the Results of a Multi-Attribute Prefer-
ence Model. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 175(7-8):1410–1448, may 2011. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/j.
artint.2010.11.008. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2010.11.008https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0004370210001979 .
[126] Christophe Labreuche and Simon Fossier. Explaining Multi-Criteria Decision Aiding Models with an
Extended Shapley Value. In J ´erˆome Lang, editor, 27th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , pages 331–339, Stockholm, jul 2018. IJCAI. ISBN 9780999241127. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.
2018/46. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2018/46 .
[127] Christophe Labreuche, Nicolas Maudet, and Wassila Ouerdane. Minimal and Complete Explanations
for Critical Multi-attribute Decisions. In Ronen I. Brafman, Fred S. Roberts, and Alexis Tsouki `as,
editors, Algorithmic Decision Theory - 2nd International Conference , pages 121–134, Piscataway, NJ,
2011. Springer. ISBN 9783642248726. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24873-3 10. URL http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-24873-3{_}10 .
[128] Carmen Lacave and Francisco J. D ´ıez. A Review of Explanation Methods for Bayesian Net-
works. Knowledge Engineering Review , 17(2):107–127, 2002. ISSN 02698889. doi: 10.1017/
S026988890200019X.
[129] Lu ´ıs C. Lamb, Artur D’Avila Garcez, Marco Gori, Marcelo O.R. Prates, Pedro H.C. Avelar, and
Moshe Y . Vardi. Graph Neural Networks Meet Neural-Symbolic Computing: A Survey and Per-
spective. In Christian Bessiere, editor, 29th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
pages 4877–4884. IJCAI, 2020. ISBN 978-0-9992411-6-5. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/679. URL
https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2020/679 .
[130] Pat Langley, Ben Meadows, Mohan Sridharan, and Dongkyu Choi. Explainable Agency for Intelligent
Autonomous Systems. In Satinder P. Singh and Shaul Markovitch, editors, 31st AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 4762–4764, San Francisco, CA, 2017. AAAI Press. URL https://
www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/IAAI/IAAI17/paper/view/15046/13734 .
[131] Martin Lauer and Martin A Riedmiller. An Algorithm for Distributed Reinforcement Learning in Coop-
erative Multi-Agent Systems. In Pat Langley, editor, 17th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 535–542, Stanford, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann.
[132] Mark Law, Alessandra Russo, and Krysia Broda. Logic-Based Learning of Answer Set Programs.
In Markus Kr ¨otzsch and Daria Stepanova, editors, Reasoning Web. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence , volume 11810, pages 196–231, Bolzano, 2019. Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-31423-1
6. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31423-1{_}4http://link.
springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-31423-1{_}6 .
[133] David B. Leake. Abduction, Experience, and Goals: A Model of Everyday Abductive Explanation.
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 7(4):407–428, 1995. ISSN 13623079.
doi: 10.1080/09528139508953820.
49 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[134] Freddy L ´ecu´e. On the Role of Knowledge Graphs in Explainable AI. Semantic Web , 11(1):41–51, jan
2020. ISSN 22104968. doi: 10.3233/SW-190374. URL https://www.medra.org/servlet/
aliasResolver?alias=iospress{&}doi=10.3233/SW-190374 .
[135] Xiao Li, Yao Ma, and Calin Belta. A Policy Search Method For Temporal Logic Speciﬁed Reinforcement
Learning Tasks. In 2018 Annual American Control Conference , pages 240–245, Milwaukee, 2018. IEEE.
doi: 10.23919/ACC.2018.8431181. URL https://doi.org/10.23919/ACC.2018.8431181 .
[136] Vladimir Lifschitz. Answer Set Programming . Springer, 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-24657-0. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-030-24658-7. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-24658-7 .
[137] Brian Y . Lim and Anind K. Dey. Toolkit to Support Intelligibility in Context-Aware Applications. In
12th ACM International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing , pages 13–22, New York, New York,
2010. ACM Press. ISBN 9781605588438. doi: 10.1145/1864349.1864353. URL http://portal.
acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1864349.1864353 .
[138] Zachary C. Lipton. The Mythos of Model Interpretability. Communications of the ACM , 61(10):36–43,
sep 2018. ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3233231. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
3233231 .
[139] Thomas Lukasiewicz, Enrico Malizia, and Cristian Molinaro. Explanations for Inconsistency-Tolerant
Query Answering under Existential Rules. In 34th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
2909–2916, New York, NY , 2020. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i03.5682. URL https:
//aaai.org/ojs/index.php/AAAI/article/view/5682 .
[140] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A Uniﬁed Approach to Interpreting Model Predic-
tions. In I Guyon, U V Luxburg, S Bengio, H Wallach, R Fergus, S Vishwanathan,
and R Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
4765–4774. Curran Associates, 2017. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions.pdf .
[141] Prashan Madumal, Tim Miller, Liz Sonenberg, and Frank Vetere. A Grounded Interaction Protocol for
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In Edith Elkind, Manuela Veloso, Noa Agmon, and Matthew E. Tay-
lor, editors, 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 1033–
1041, Montreal, 2019. IFAAMAS. URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3331801 .
[142] Prashan Madumal, Tim Miller, Liz Sonenberg, and Frank Vetere. Explainable Reinforcement Learning
through a Causal Lens. In 34th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 2493–2500, New York,
NY , 2020. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v34i03.5631. URL https://aaai.org/ojs/index.
php/AAAI/article/view/5631 .
[143] Peter McBurney and Simon Parsons. Games that Agents Play: A Formal Framework for Dialogues
Between Autonomous Agents. Journal of Logic, Language and Information , 11(3):315–334, 2002.
ISSN 15729583. doi: 10.1023/A:1015586128739.
[144] Tim Miller. Explanation in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Insights from the Social Sciences. Artiﬁcial In-
telligence , 267:1–38, 2019. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007 .
[145] Pasquale Minervini, Matko Bo ˇsnjak, Tim Rockt ¨aschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Edward Grefenstette.
Differentiable Reasoning on Large Knowledge Bases and Natural Language. In 34th AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 5182–5190, New York, NY , 2020. AAAI Press. doi: 10.1609/
50 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
aaai.v34i04.5962. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.10824https://aaai.org/ojs/
index.php/AAAI/article/view/5962 .
[146] Brent Mittelstadt, Chris Russell, and Sandra Wachter. Explaining Explanations in AI. In 2019 Confer-
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 279–288, Atlanta, GA, 2019. ACM. ISBN
9781450361255. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287574.
[147] Sanjay Modgil. Reasoning About Preferences in Argumentation Frameworks. Artiﬁcial In-
telligence , 173(9-10):901–934, jun 2009. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2009.02.001.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2009.02.001https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0004370209000162 .
[148] Sanjay Modgil and Martin Caminada. Proof Theories and Algorithms for Abstract Argumentation
Frameworks. In Guillermo Ricardo Simari and Iyad Rahwan, editors, Argumentation in Artiﬁcial In-
telligence , chapter 6, pages 105–129. Springer, 2009. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-98197-0 6.
[149] Sina Mohseni, Niloofar Zarei, and Eric D. Ragan. A Multidisciplinary Survey and Framework for Design
and Evaluation of Explainable AI Systems. ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems , 2020.
doi: 10.1145/3387166.
[150] Johanna D. Moore and William R. Swartout. Pointing: A Way Toward Explanation Dialogue. In
Howard E. Shrobe, Thomas G. Dietterich, and William R. Swartout, editors, 8th National Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 457–464, Boston, 1990. AAAI Press/MIT Press. URL http:
//www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/1990/aaai90-069.php .
[151] Bernard Moulin, Hengameh Irandoust, Micheline B ´elanger, and G Desbordes. Explanation and Argu-
mentation Capabilities: Towards the Creation of More Persuasive Agents. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review ,
17(3):169–222, 2002. ISSN 02692821. doi: 10.1023/A:1015023512975.
[152] Shane T. Mueller, Robert R. Hoffman, William Clancey, Abigail Emrey, and Gary Klein. Explanation in
Human-AI Systems: A Literature Meta-Review, Synopsis of Key Ideas and Publications, and Bibliogra-
phy for Explainable AI. Technical report, DARPA, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.
01876 .
[153] Stephen Muggleton and Luc de Raedt. Inductive Logic Programming: Theory and Methods. The Jour-
nal of Logic Programming , 19-20(2):629–679, may 1994. doi: 10.1016/0743-1066(94)90035-3. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0743106694900353 .
[154] Pradeep K Murukannaiah, Nirav Ajmeri, Catholijn M Jonker, and Munindar P Singh. New Foundations
of Ethical Multiagent Systems. In Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, Gita Sukthankar, Bo An, and Neil Yorke-
Smith, editors, 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems - Blue Sky
Ideas Track , pages 1706–1710, Auckland, 2020. IFAAMAS.
[155] Robert Neches, William R Swartout, and Johanna D Moore. Explainable (and Maintainable) Expert
Systems. In Aravind K. Joshi, editor, 9th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
382–389, Los Angeles, 1985. Morgan Kaufmann. URL http://ijcai.org/Proceedings/
85-1/Papers/072.pdf .
[156] Ulf H. Nielsen, Jean Philippe Pellet, and Andr ´e Elissee. Explanation Trees for Causal Bayesian Net-
works. In David A. McAllester and Petri Myllym ¨aki, editors, 24th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence , pages 427–434, Helsinki, 2008. AUAI Press. ISBN 0974903949.
51 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[157] Andreas Niskanen and Matti J ¨arvisalo. Smallest Explanations and Diagnoses of Rejection in Abstract
Argumentation. In 17th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Rea-
soning , Rhodes, 2020.
[158] Ingrid Nunes and Dietmar Jannach. A Systematic Review and Taxonomy of Explanations in Decision
Support and Recommender Systems. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction , 27(3-5):393–444,
dec 2017. ISSN 0924-1868. doi: 10.1007/s11257-017-9195-0. URL http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/s11257-017-9195-0 .
[159] Ingrid Nunes, Simon Miles, Michael Luck, Simone Barbosa, and Carlos Lucena. Pattern-based Explana-
tion for Automated Decisions. In Torsten Schaub, Gerhard Friedrich, and Barry O’Sullivan, editors, 21st
European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 263, pages 669–674. IOS Press, 2014. ISBN
9781614994183. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-419-0-669.
[160] Barry O’Callaghan, Barry O’Sullivan, and Eugene C. Freuder. Generating Corrective Explanations for
Interactive Constraint Satisfaction. In Peter van Beek, editor, Principles and Practice of Constraint
Programming , pages 445–459, Sitges, 2005. Springer. doi: 10.1007/11564751 34. URL http://
link.springer.com/10.1007/11564751{_}34 .
[161] Johannes Oetsch, J ¨org P ¨uhrer, and Hans Tompits. Catching the Ouroboros: On Debugging Non-ground
Answer-Set Programs. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming , 10(4-6):513–529, jul 2010. ISSN
1471-0684. doi: 10.1017/S1471068410000256. URL https://www.cambridge.org/core/
product/identifier/S1471068410000256/type/journal{_}article .
[162] Barry O’Sullivan, Alexandre Papadopoulos, Boi Faltings, and Pearl Pu. Representative Explanations
for Over-Constrained Problems. In 22nd AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 323–328,
Vancouver, 2007. AAAI Press. ISBN 1577353234.
[163] Judea Pearl. The Seven Tools of Causal Inference, with Reﬂections on Machine Learning. Com-
munications of the ACM , 62(3):54–60, feb 2019. ISSN 00010782. doi: 10.1145/3241036. URL
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=3314328.3241036 .
[164] Rafael Pe ˜naloza and Barıs ¸ Sertkaya. Understanding the Complexity of Axiom Pinpointing in
Lightweight Description Logics. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 250:80–104, sep 2017. ISSN 00043702. doi:
10.1016/j.artint.2017.06.002. URL https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0004370217300711 .
[165] Ram ´on Pino-P ´erez and Carlos Uzc ´ategui. Preferences and Explanations. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 149(1):
1–30, 2003. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(03)00042-0.
[166] Enrico Pontelli, Tran Cao Son, and Omar Elkhatib. Justiﬁcations for Logic Programs under Answer
Set Semantics. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming , 9(1):1–56, jan 2009. ISSN 1471-0684.
doi: 10.1017/S1471068408003633. URL https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/
identifier/S1471068408003633/type/journal{_}article .
[167] David Poole. On the Comparison of Theories: Preferring the Most Speciﬁc Explanation. In Aravind K.
Joshi, editor, 9th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 144–147, Los Angeles,
1985. Morgan Kaufmann.
[168] Henry Prakken and Giovanni Sartor. Modelling Reasoning with Precedents in a Formal Dialogue
Game. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law , 6(2-4):231–287, 1998. ISSN 0924-8463. doi: 10.1023/A:
1008278309945.
52 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[169] Alun Preece. Asking ‘Why’ in AI: Explainability of Intelligent Systems – Perspectives and Challenges.
Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Management , 25(2):63–72, 2018. ISSN 21600074. doi:
10.1002/isaf.1422.
[170] Alessandro Previti and Jo ˜ao Marques-Silva. Partial MUS Enumeration. In Marie DesJardins and
Michael L. Littman, editors, 27th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 818–825, Bellevue,
WA, 2013. AAAI Press. ISBN 9781577356158.
[171] Christopher Pulte, Jean Pichon-Pharabod, Jeehoon Kang, Sung Hwan Lee, and Chung-Kil Hur.
Promising-ARM/RISC-V: A Simpler and Faster Operational Concurrency Model. In Kathryn S McKin-
ley and Kathleen Fisher, editors, 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
and Implementation , pages 1–15, Phoenix, AZ, 2019. ACM. doi: 10.1145/3314221.3314624. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314221.3314624 .
[172] Antonio Rago, Oana Cocarascu, and Francesca Toni. Argumentation-Based Recommendations: Fantas-
tic Explanations and How to Find Them. In J ´erˆome Lang, editor, 27th International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1949–1955, Stockholm, 2018. IJCAI. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2018/269.
[173] Alex Raymond, Hatice Gunes, and Amanda Prorok. Culture-Based Explainable Human-Agent Decon-
ﬂiction. In Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, Gita Sukthankar, Bo An, and Neil Yorke-Smith, editors, 19th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 1107–1115, Auckland,
2020. IFAAMAS.
[174] Raymond Reiter. A Logic for Default Reasoning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 13(1-2):81–132, 1980. ISSN
00043702. doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(80)90014-4.
[175] Raymond Reiter. A Theory of Diagnosis from First Principles. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 32(1):57–95,
apr 1987. ISSN 00043702. doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(87)90062-2. URL https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0004370287900622 .
[176] Mireia Ribera and Agata Lapedriza. Can We Do Better Explanations? A Proposal of User-Centered
Explainable AI. In 24th Annual Meeting of the Intelligent Interfaces Community Workshops , volume
2327, Los Angeles, USA, 2019. ACM.
[177] Avi Rosenfeld and Ariella Richardson. Explainability in Human-Agent Systems. Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems , pages 1–33, may 2019. ISSN 1387-2532. doi: 10.1007/
s10458-019-09408-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-019-09408-yhttp://
link.springer.com/10.1007/s10458-019-09408-y .
[178] Francesca Rossi, Peter van Beek, and Toby Walsh, editors. Handbook of Constraint Programming ,
volume 2 of Foundations of Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Elsevier, 2006. ISBN 978-0-444-52726-4. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/bookseries/15746526/2 .
[179] Chiaki Sakama. Abduction in Argumentation Frameworks. Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics ,
28(2-3):218–239, 2018. ISSN 19585780. doi: 10.1080/11663081.2018.1487241.
[180] Claudia Schulz and Francesca Toni. ABA-Based Answer Set Justiﬁcation. Theory and Practice of Logic
Programming , 13(Online-Supplement):4–5, 2013.
[181] Claudia Schulz and Francesca Toni. Justifying Answer Sets Using Argumentation. Theory and Practice
of Logic Programming , 16(1):59–110, 2016. doi: 10.1017/S1471068414000702.
53 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[182] Naziha Sendi, Nadia Abchiche-Mimouni, and Farida Zehraoui. A new Transparent Ensemble Method
based on Deep learning. Procedia Computer Science , 159:271–280, jan 2019. ISSN 1877-0509.
doi: 10.1016/J.PROCS.2019.09.182. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1877050919313614 .
[183] Dunja ˇSeˇselja and Christian Straßer. Abstract Argumentation and Explanation Applied to Scientiﬁc
Debates. Synthese , 190(12):2195–2217, aug 2013. ISSN 0039-7857. doi: 10.1007/s11229-011-9964-y.
URLhttp://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11229-011-9964-y .
[184] Kostyantyn M Shchekotykhin. Interactive Query-Based Debugging of ASP Programs. In Blai
Bonet and Sven Koenig, editors, 29th AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1597–1603,
Austin, Texas, 2015. AAAI. URL http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/
paper/view/9400 .
[185] Andy Shih, Arthur Choi, and Adnan Darwiche. A Symbolic Approach to Explaining Bayesian Network
Classiﬁers. In J ´erˆome Lang, editor, 27th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
5103–5111, Stockholm, 2018. IJCAI. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2018/708.
[186] Elizabeth I. Sklar and Mohammad Q. Azhar. Explanation through Argumentation. In Michita Imai,
Tim Norman, Elizabeth Sklar, and Takanori Komatsu, editors, 6th International Conference on Human-
Agent Interaction , pages 277–285, Southampton, dec 2018. ACM. ISBN 9781450359535. doi: 10.1145/
3284432.3284470. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3284432.3284470 .
[187] Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Fooling LIME and
SHAP: Adversarial Attacks on Post hoc Explanation Methods. In Annette N. Markham, Julia Powles,
Toby Walsh, and Anne L. Washington, editors, AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society , pages
180–186, New York, NY , 2020. ACM. ISBN 9781450371100. doi: 10.1145/3375627.3375830. URL
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3375627.3375830 .
[188] Kacper Sokol and Peter Flach. Conversational Explanations of Machine Learning Predictions Through
Class-Contrastive Counterfactual Statements. In J ´erˆome Lang, editor, 27th International Joint Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 5785–5786, Stockholm, 2018. IJCAI. ISBN 9780999241127. doi:
10.24963/ijcai.2018/836.
[189] Kacper Sokol and Peter Flach. Explainability Fact Sheets: A Framework for Systematic Assessment of
Explainable Approaches. In Mireille Hildebrandt, Carlos Castillo, Elisa Celis, Salvatore Ruggieri, Linnet
Taylor, and Gabriela Zanﬁr-Fortuna, editors, Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,
pages 56–67, Barcelona, jan 2020. ACM. ISBN 9781450369367. doi: 10.1145/3351095.3372870. URL
http://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3351095.3372870 .
[190] Kacper Sokol and Peter Flach. One Explanation Does Not Fit All. KI - K ¨unstliche Intelli-
genz, 34(2):235–250, jun 2020. ISSN 0933-1875. doi: 10.1007/s13218-020-00637-y. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13218-020-00637-yhttp://link.springer.com/
10.1007/s13218-020-00637-y .
[191] Frode Sørmo, J ¨org Cassens, and Agnar Aamodt. Explanation in Case-Based Reasoning - Perspec-
tives and Goals. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review , 24(2):109–143, 2005. ISSN 0269-2821. doi:
10.1007/s10462-005-4607-7.
54 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[192] Mohammed H. Sqalli and Eugene C. Freuder. Inference-Based Constraint Satisfaction Supports Ex-
planation. In William J. Clancey and Daniel S. Weld, editors, 13th National Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence , volume 1, pages 318–325, Portland, 1996. AAAI Press/MIT Press. URL http:
//www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/1996/aaai96-048.php .
[193] Sarath Sreedharan, Siddharth Srivastava, David Smith, and Subbarao Kambhampati. Why Can’t You Do
That HAL? Explaining Unsolvability of Planning Tasks. In Sarit Kraus, editor, 28th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 1422–1430, Macao, aug 2019. IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-9992411-
4-1. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/197. URL https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2019/197 .
[194] Ramya Srinivasan and Ajay Chander. Explanation Perspectives from the Cognitive Sciences - A Survey.
In Christian Bessiere, editor, 29th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 4812–
4818, Yokohama, 2020. IJCAI. ISBN 978-0-9992411-6-5. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/670. URL https:
//www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2020/670 .
[195] Geoff Sutcliffe and Christian B Suttner. Evaluating General Purpose Automated Theorem Proving
Systems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 131(1-2):39–54, 2001. doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(01)00113-8. URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(01)00113-8 .
[196] William R Swartout, C ´ecile Paris, and Johanna D Moore. Explanations in Knowledge Systems: Design
for Explainable Expert Systems. IEEE Expert , 6(3):58–64, jun 1991. ISSN 0885-9000. doi: 10.1109/
64.87686. URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/87686/ .
[197] Sjoerd T. Timmer, John-Jules Ch. Meyer, Henry Prakken, Silja Renooij, and Bart Verheij. A Two-
Phase Method for Extracting Explanatory Arguments from Bayesian Networks. International Journal
of Approximate Reasoning , 80:475–494, jan 2017. ISSN 0888613X. doi: 10.1016/j.ijar.2016.09.002.
[198] Richard Tomsett, Dave Braines, Dan Harborne, Alun Preece, and Supriyo Chakraborty. Interpretable
to Whom? A Role-Based Model for Analyzing Interpretable Machine Learning Systems. In Dawid W
Aha, Trevor Darrell, Patrick Doherty, and Daniele Magazzeni, editors, 2nd Workshop on Explainable
Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Stockholm, 2018.
[199] Francesca Toni. Automated Information Management via Abductive Logic Agents. Telematics and
Informatics , 18(1):89–104, feb 2001. ISSN 07365853. doi: 10.1016/S0736-5853(00)00020-4. URL
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0736585300000204 .
[200] Gianluca Torta, Luca Anselma, and Daniele Theseider Dupr ´e. Exploiting Abstractions in Cost-sensitive
Abductive Problem Solving with Observations and Actions. AI Communications , 27(3):245–262, 2014.
ISSN 09217126. doi: 10.3233/AIC-140593.
[201] Gianluca Torta, Roberto Micalizio, and Samuele Sormano. Temporal Multiagent Plan Execution: Ex-
plaining What Happened. In Davide Calvaresi, Amro Najjar, Michael Schumacher, and Kary Fr ¨amling,
editors, Explainable, Transparent Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems - 1st International Work-
shop , pages 167–185. Springer, 2019. ISBN 978-3-030-30390-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-30391-4.
URLhttp://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-30391-4 .
[202] Carlos Viegas Dam ´asio, Anastasia Analyti, and Grigoris Antoniou. Justiﬁcations for Logic
Programming. In Pedro Cabalar and Tran Cao Son, editors, Logic Programming and Non-
monotonic Reasoning, 12th International Conference , pages 530–542, Coruna, 2013. Springer.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-40564-8 53. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-642-40564-8{_}53 .
55 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[203] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual Explanations without Opening
the Black Box: Automated Decisions and the GDPR. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology , 31(2):
841–887, 2018. ISSN 1556-5068. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.3063289. URL https://www.ssrn.com/
abstract=3063289 .
[204] Douglas Walton. A New Dialectical Theory of Explanation. Philosophical Explorations , 7(1):
71–89, mar 2004. ISSN 1386-9795. doi: 10.1080/1386979032000186863. URL http://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1386979032000186863 .
[205] Douglas Walton. A Dialogue System Speciﬁcation for Explanation. Synthese , 182(3):349–374, oct
2011. ISSN 0039-7857. doi: 10.1007/s11229-010-9745-z. URL http://link.springer.com/
10.1007/s11229-010-9745-z .
[206] Douglas Walton. A Dialogue System for Evaluating Explanations. In Argument Evaluation
and Evidence , volume 23 of Law, Governance and Technology Series , pages 69–116. Springer,
2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-19626-8 3. URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-3-319-19626-8{_}3 .
[207] Danding Wang, Qian Yang, Ashraf Abdul, and Brian Y . Lim. Designing Theory-Driven User-
Centric Explainable AI. In Stephen A. Brewster, Geraldine Fitzpatrick, Anna L. Cox, and Vassilis
Kostakos, editors, Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Glasgow, 2019. ACM. ISBN
9781450359702. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300831. URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
doid=3290605.3300831 .
[208] Felix Winter, Peter J Stuckey, and Nysret Musliu. Explaining Propagators for String Edit Distance Con-
straints. In Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, Gita Sukthankar, Bo An, and Neil Yorke-Smith, editors, 19th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 1676–1683, Auckland,
2020. AAAI Press.
[209] Xiaoxin Yin and Jiawei Han. CPAR: Classiﬁcation Based on Predictive Association Rules. In Daniel
Barbar ´a and Chandrika Kamath, editors, 3rd SIAM International Conference on Data Mining , pages
331–335, San Francisco, CA, 2013. SIAM. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611972733.40.
[210] Zhiwei Zeng, Xiuyi Fan, Chunyan Miao, Cyril Leung, Chin Jing Jih, and Ong Yew Soon. Context-
Based and Explainable Decision Making with Argumentation. In 17th International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pages 1114–1122, Stockholm, 2018. IFAAMAS. URL
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3237383.3237862 .
[211] Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Basar. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: A Selective
Overview of Theories and Algorithms. CoRR , abs/1911.1, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1911.10635 .
[212] Qiaoting Zhong, Xiuyi Fan, Francesca Toni, and Xudong Luo. Explaining Best Decisions via Argumen-
tation. In Andreas Herzig and Emiliano Lorini, editors, European Conference on Social Intelligence ,
volume 1283 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings , pages 224–237, Barcelona, 2014. CEUR-WS.org.
[213] Qiaoting Zhong, Xiuyi Fan, Xudong Luo, and Francesca Toni. An Explainable Multi-Attribute Decision
Model Based on Argumentation. Expert Systems with Applications , 117:42–61, 2019. ISSN 09574174.
doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2018.09.038.
56 Ericsson Research
K.ˇCyras et al. Report on Explainability in Machine Reasoning
[214] Yishan Zhou and David Danks. Different ”Intelligibility” for Different Folks. In Annette N. Markham,
Julia Powles, Toby Walsh, and Anne L. Washington, editors, AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society , pages 194–199, New York, NY , feb 2020. ACM. ISBN 9781450371100. doi: 10.1145/3375627.
3375810. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3375627.3375810 .
57 Ericsson Research
