Say “knowledge management” to most business people
today and they immediately think technology. Technologymay be part of most knowledge management (KM) ini-tiatives, but rather than dictating the concept of KM, it isbest used in an enabling role as one part of a compre-hensive approach. Successful KM is a complex mix ofbusiness processes, people, and technology. While sup-ported by technology, successful KM initiatives are notsimply technological solutions. They are programs ofwide-reaching cultural change that impact the organiza-tion in significant ways. More importantly, in order forany organization to accomplish its mission, businessprocesses that emphasize employee engagement andfacilitate the identification, sharing, and cultivation ofknowledge need to be designed and implemented.The concept of learning before, during, and after any
event or project was introduced as a KM initiative atBritish Petroleum in the mid 1990s and has been usedsuccessfully in many companies since. A variety of toolswere adopted to support these learning processes.“Peer assists” facilitated learning before, “after actionreviews” contributed to learning during, and “retrospects”offered learning after the project. The “knowledge asset”(KA) was the tangible knowledge management product.It is the core repository for explicit organizational knowl-edge and expertise.
Jo Singel, a VP in corporate education in the HR
department of Chase Manhattan Bank was responsiblefor an automated information system called theMeasuring Learning Impact (MLI) system.This system,administered by two employees, measured the impactof learning initiatives throughout the bank. For 18
3THEMANCHESTER REVIEW • D OUBLE ISSUE2001 •  V OLUME 6 • N UMBERS 2 AND3
Tools for a Real Knowledge
Management Payoff
By Maria Seddio
Adapted from an article published in Hamlet , June 2001
Maria C. Seddio is a vice president specializing in executive coaching and organizational development in Manchester ’s
Parsippany, New Jersey office. Maria ’s writing and research focus on self-organizing systems, the concepts of learning, leader-
ship, and difference, and the ways in which communication practices determine business outcomes. She can be reached at973-539-9100.
months they had worked hard to design and imple-
ment the MLI, and by many accounts the project wasa success.The bank was able to identify those train-ing and development efforts that were meeting theirlearning objectives and therefore could target andbudget for programs accordingly. But, because it was arelatively new system, these two employees held near-ly all of the institutional knowledge of the system.
Ms. Singel began to fear the potential impact on her
small group, since the specialized expertise requiredto administer the MLI was in the hands of only twopeople in the entire department.What would happento the project if either or both of her key employeesleft? How could she protect the bank from losing thekey and critical knowledge that supported the MLIand the project ’s success?  She decided to involve
these employees in the development of a knowledgeasset around the MLI.When both of these employeesdecided to leave the organization less than one yearlater, she was glad that she had.
In the course of developing the MLI knowledge asset
an important change had taken place. Chase hadannounced and begun implementation of a mergerwith JP Morgan.This meant that the new team thatwas assigned to take over the MLI would need tolearn about and take ownership for the system whilethey simultaneously dealt with merger integration andassimilation issues.That they were able to step intotheir new responsibilities without any significant diffi-culty is a powerful testament to knowledge manage-ment at work.
Recently, I had the opportunity to talk to Jo Singel
about the MLI project. Included in our conversationwere Carol Gorelick and Carter Crawford of Solutionsfor Information & Management Services, Inc. —both
of whom were responsible for creating the knowl-edge asset for the MLI at JP Morgan Chase.
Maria Seddio: Can you tell us about “knowl-
edge assets” and why it was so important inthe MLI story?
Jo Singel:
I can only tell you that it was a case of sur-
vival; perhaps that is why the story is so compelling.For all intents and purposes, without the knowledgeasset, the MLI would have been lost or at the veryleast significantly disrupted. Development required 18months of work. Imagine the cost to the company, tosay nothing of how demoralizing that kind of experi-ence can be for the people who have worked longand hard to make it happen! Carol and Carter canexplain the mechanics, but for me the knowledge
asset was a life line at a time when we could have lostthe foundation of our project.
Carter Crawford: Once upon a time, in the
Industrial Age, machinery determined what you couldproduce and sell.That is no longer true.Today, themost important asset is people and what they know.But unlike machinery, people are mobile —they up
and leave —and when they leave an organization, their
knowledge goes with them.As companies come torealize the value of their intellectual assets, they areputting into place initiatives that manage these assets.
…people are mobile—they up and leave
—and when they leave an organization,
their knowledge goes with them. 
The most popular term for these initiatives is knowl-
edge management.Actually we prefer the term“knowledge mobilization. ”But it makes no difference
what you call it.The goals are simple: Make all suc-cesses repeatable and sustainable. Recognize whenyou make a mistake and never make the same mistakein the same way ever again. Never reinvent the wheelor duplicate an effort. Keep the learning curve asshort and fast as possible. Make every decision, atevery level, with the full force of your knowledgebase behind you.These make up the foundationalcreed of knowledge management. Now, there are vari-ous tools and processes that we use to mine theknowledge in any organization or area of the busi-ness.We come at it from all angles.
Carol Gorelick: Yes, the knowledge asset is really a
tool for knowledge management. Knowledge assetsare concerned with the “what, where, when, who,
how, and why ”of key areas of a business.They
include histories of what has been done in the past(what has worked and not worked), codes of prac-tice that are validated as a future approach (themap), what they ’ve been doing that can be used by
others, actual participant comments (their stories intheir own words —can be in written, audio, or video
form), and links to others who have the experienceand often the tacit knowledge that keeps the organi-zation moving.
CC:Knowledge assets are organic —they are never
finished. Stories are added, and new informationincluded on an ongoing basis.Above all, things
4THEMANCHESTER REVIEW • DOUBLE ISSUE2001 •  VOLUME 6 • NUMBERS 2 AND3
change; the knowledge asset is built to accommodate
and reflect these changes.
MS: I am intrigued. You say you prefer the term
“knowledge mobilization. ” That ’s an interesting
distinction. Can you tell me why you make it apoint to introduce the term to organizations?
CC:
Knowledge management is an unfortunate term,
but it has been around for so long that it will proba-bly stick. Most likely the management part stemmedfrom organizations putting in place systematicprocesses to capture their information, applications,expertise, and know-how: their intellectual capital.Knowledge mobilization not only has the sameacronym, but it more accurately describes what KM isall about: moving knowledge and expertise across anorganization.
Knowledge mobilization …more
accurately describes what KM is allabout: moving knowledge and
expertise across an organization. 
CG:It is not capturing knowledge that counts.
“Captured knowledge ”is static knowledge —at best it
serves a limited purpose in the organization, just onevery small part of what needs to occur for organiza-tions to truly realize the benefits of the expertise,experience, and know-how that drives the business.Knowledge mobilization emphasizes action; in a wayit is about how we put legs to our knowledge, travelit throughout the organization, and operationalize itwithin the business.The payoff is in reusing and refin-ing our knowledge at every opportunity. Mobilizationspeaks to the energy and active participation that isrequired in this process.
MS: Interesting. But back to the JP Morgan
Chase story. What criteria do you look for whenputting together a knowledge asset?
JS:
I was thankful that I had two articulate individuals
who were able to put their work into words. I thinkthat really worked well with the MLI.They also knewwhat they were doing.They had a clear understand-ing of their work as well as how it fit with the others ’
work.They could see the proverbial big picture.
CG:Yes, that always helps. But it ’s not a requirement,
in fact some very inarticulate people hold key knowl-edge in organizations, and in those cases, the knowl-
edge asset may be even more critical.We look to linkthe knowledge asset to major processes or functions.In the bank case, training was a major budget itembank-wide.The training departments needed to meas-ure the impact of each of their different courses, andthe MLI did this for them.
CC:Oftentimes KAs grow out of a process we call a
“retrospect. ”Retrospects are best described as “knowl-
edge capture events ”which are held at the end of a
project, involving as many members of the projectteam as possible. It is an effective way of capturingthe knowledge before the team disbands.
CG:These are structured, facilitated meetings which
can last anywhere from a couple of hours to a fewdays. It helps to identify valuable lessons learned andis a documented resource for others with similarprojects. Let ’s say you are in a consumer products
company that introduces many new products.Aftereach new product launch, you conduct a retrospect.Several of these retrospects can then be put togeth-er to create a knowledge asset on launching newproducts.
MS: Information changes so rapidly, how do you
ensure that the knowledge asset does not becomedated? Do you ever purge the old information?
CC:
Oh sure, absolutely; that ’s a real concern. Old
information, if it is no longer valued, should be elimi-nated. Someone has to own —take real responsibility
for—a KA. Let ’s say a law firm has a KA on “What we
know about writing contracts involved in intellectualproperty. ”The law firm probably has a group of
lawyers who work on contracts.We would recom-mend that they formalize their group into a communi-ty and select one person to own the KA.Then, whenone lawyer works out a new or innovative way ofhandling a contract, it can be reviewed by the groupand added to the KA.The same process would applyto outdated information.
MS: In business environments that value success
and emphasize “getting it right, ” how do you get
people to talk about their mistakes?
CG:Good question.We like to phrase the question
“What could be improved? ”or “What would you do
differently next time? ”rather than “What went
wrong? ”Also, people are more willing to talk about
improvements if they are allowed to make the recom-mendations themselves. It is not what they did
5THEMANCHESTER REVIEW • DOUBLE ISSUE2001 •  VOLUME 6 • NUMBERS 2 AND3
wrong; it is how they are going to do it even better.
Good facilitation skills help.
JS:That wasn ’t a problem with the MLI. Of course
there were corrections that had to be made.This wasthe team that launched the project and there were tri-als and errors early on.We had to figure out whatworked best. But both of these employees wereproud of the way they learned from the early mis-takes, and what they did with them.We made changesalong the way, and it made the project stronger.TheKA captured all of this; it was part of the process, andall of this got passed along.
MS: What do you think makes the knowledge
asset so useful? What ’s the one thing that HR
professionals and business leaders should knowabout this work?
CC:
Where should we start? The obvious points are
collecting, harvesting, and storing valuable knowledgefor the organization, and identifying the people whoare most experienced in different areas. I think, andthis is the part that I find so exciting when I ’m work-
ing with people on a KA, that the process generateseven more knowledge as people come together tosort out their experiences and articulate the tacitknowledge that makes the difference to the project
or area of the business.
…the process generates even more
knowledge as people come together tosort out their experiences andarticulate the tacit knowledge thatmakes the difference to the project or
area of the business.
JS:It was very gratifying to see employees take such a
sense of ownership around the project.The excite-ment this effort generated was palpable, and the KAcaptured not only their words but also the expressionon their faces and their desire to share their workwith others. I think it is precisely this sense of con-tributing to a larger effort —to this knowledge effort —
that makes the KA so powerful and useful to theorganization.These employees have come and gonebut they remain an indelible part of the business.Youknow that they are part of the halls and walls of thisorganization and that is a powerful thing.
6THEMANCHESTER REVIEW • DOUBLE ISSUE2001 •  VOLUME 6 • NUMBERS 2 AND3
What Is the Goal?
The overarching goal of KM is to deliver out-
standing business success through full and sys-tematic use of your organization ’s knowledge,
tapping into what your organization knows todeliver superior business results.
The KM Process:
•Make all successes repeatable and sustainable.
•Recognize when you make a mistake and
never make it again.
•Never reinvent the wheel or duplicate an
effort.
•Shorten the learning curve.
•Make every decision, at every level, with
awareness of the full knowledge base ofyour organization.The KM Payoff
Successful KM is a complex mix of business processes,
people, and technology.
Knowledge Management Tools
Knowledge Assets
Knowledge assets encompass the “what, why,
where, who, when, and how ”about key areas of the
business.They consist of the following:
•performance histories of what has been done in
the past
•code of practice distilled and validated as a
future approach
•actual participant comments in text, audio, or
audiovisual format
•links to the community of practice where the
experience and tacit knowledge reside
Knowledge assets should be organic and grow in
knowledge as the organization grows and learns.
Peer Assists
Peer assists are structured, facilitated meetings or
workshops where individuals are invited from otherbusiness units or other businesses, to share theirexperience, insights, and knowledge with a teamthat has requested help.A peer assist targets a spe-cific and significant business issue and results inrecommendations for improved approaches to theissue and new information areas to explore. Forsome companies, peer assists have become thefastest way to start delivering business benefitsfrom their company ’s knowledge.After Action Reviews
After action reviews are short, focused meetings for
a team, by the team, lasting less than half an hourand held after every identifiable team event. Fourquestions are answered by all the team members:
•What was supposed to happen?
•What actually happened?
•Why were there differences?
•What can we learn?
After action reviews allow the team to address and
optimize the way they work during a project and tostart building their collective operational knowl-edge.They are the foundation for a knowledge cul-ture in the work place.
Retrospects
A retrospect is a knowledge-capture event held at
the end of a project, involving as many members ofthe project team as possible.This is an effective wayto capture the knowledge before the team disbands.It is a structured and facilitated meeting which lastsfrom a couple of hours to a couple of days.A retro-spect results in identifying valuable lessons learnedand is a documented resource for others with simi-lar projects. It is a means to build KM into yourproject management process.
7THEMANCHESTER REVIEW • DOUBLE ISSUE • 2001 •  VOLUME 6 • NUMBER 2 AND3
