 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 1 of 16 
 
 
 
EUCIP  
IT System s Architect  
  
 
Professional  Profile Specification  
 
 
 
 
Version 3.0, April  2011  
                                             
 
Short Description  
A EUCIP IT Systems Architect is expected to play a key role in designing 
performing and secure I T systems - with a special focus on software 
architectures - integrating and upg rading them; besides a thorough 
competence in ICT (all domains: software, hardware and networks), this  
requires specific design techniques and the ability to describe a system 
in terms of components and logical flows.  
This profile requires a minimum work experience of 60 months in a compatible 
job role; if this requirement is not fulfilled, the candidate might be certified as 
an Associate  IT System Architect.
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 2 of 16 
 
Tasks Overview  
The IT System s Architect works within organisations (either as an employee or as an 
external provider), operating within the scope of the tasks assigned by the 
management, to identify solutions to business requirements via reasoned application 
of IT. These sol utions are presented in the form of IT architectures and include 
processes, services and systems.  
 
Based on the organization’s business requirements and goals, participates to the 
definition of business processes in terms of activities and functions, and d evelops 
them into fully operational IT architectures, selecting and applying suitable 
frameworks and methodologies.  
 
Manages the IT architecture’s entire lifecycle, understanding changing business 
requirements and incrementally defining a detailed technic al solution.  
 
Reviews the IT architecture in terms of balance between benefits, costs and risks, 
including security threats. Provides the management with detailed funding and cost 
justification and return on Investment (ROI) evaluations.  
 
Ensures that indi vidual IT solutions and applications fit within the organization 
business strategy, comply with the organization’s IT standards and fully support the 
enterprise -wide IT architecture.  
 
Monitors the IT architecture’s overall effectiveness, the efficiency of individual IT 
solutions (in terms of ICT equipment, processing and communication capacity, data 
structures, objects, algorithms, business logic, etc.) and the technical feasibility of 
proposed new  solutions, assessing their risks, costs and potential bene fits.  
 
Identifies legacy systems integration and migration problems and provides suitable 
answers in terms of models and practical implementation solutions.  
 
Ensures that individual IT solutions satisfy the organization’s non -functional 
requirements, incl uding quality, security, performance, usability and scalability.  
 
Provides technical leadership and guidance to the architecture construction and 
maintenance team in all phases of development, deployment and maintenance of  IT 
architectures.  
 
Advises the o rganisation on emerging trends and innovations regarding IT 
architectures, and highlights best practices in similar/relevant industries.  
 
Leads the evaluation and comparison of IT technologies, reporting to the 
management, reporting on alternative scenario s and assessing opportunities  related 
to new  and emerging technologies.  
 
Contributes to innovation by participating in programmes and projects for the 
enhancement of IT architecture design and deployment methodologies.  
 
Produces high quality design docu ments and written reports, describing  IT 
architectural solutions  in a clear and terse style.   
 
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 3 of 16 
 
Plans and manages effective communication (i.e. various types of formal and 
informal meetings, training, presentations, demonstrations, brainstorming etc.) 
showing good relational skills, goal -orientation, a problem -solving attitude, business 
sensitivity and a full mastery of communication techniques.  
 
Essential Behavioural Skills   [ 4 ]1 
The IT System Analyst role requires a sound technical basis, a strong will  to learn, 
excellent oral and written expression, and a wide range of more specific behavioural 
skills.  
 
A keen interest in technology innovation, the ability to collect and understand new 
information, plus organisational and business sensitivity are requi red to successfully 
design, deplo y and maintain IT architectures.  
 
Strategic vision, analytical and synthetic intelligence, imagination and proactivity are 
required to formulate and validate solutions.  
 
A persistent goal -driven approach, flexibility, deter mination, planning and control 
aptitude, teambuilding are also required to achieve actual results.  
 
                                                 
1 numbers in brackets represent EUCIP points  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 4 of 16 
 
Detailed Skills Required  
Deep  competence level  [ 9,5 ] 
A1.02 Requirements engineering  [ 2 ] 
 Distinguish between Functional and Non Functional requirements . 
 Use What, Why, How questioning to elicit requirements.  
 Differentiate between requirements and project constraints.  
 Identify the Actors in the Requirements Management process: 
Domain Expert, End User, Requirements Engineer, and 
Developer.  
 Perform requirem ents elicitation.  
 Perform Problem and Business understanding activities.  
 Understand the needs and constraints of stakeholders.  
 Use Creative thinking and related techniques (e.g. interviews and 
scenarios, observation, prototyping, workshops, generic 
require ments for industry sector).  
 Prioritise Requirements (e.g. 80/20, MoSCoW, Needs and Musts).  
 Resolve overlapping requirements.  
 Judge whether a problem is a cause or symptom.  
 Resolve conflicting requirements.  
 Reduce ambiguity of requirements .  
 Ensure Testabil ity of requirements.  
 Support requirements validation via reviews and prototyping.  
 Achieve Requirement Refinement.  
 Manage the requirements definition process.  
 Differentiate between stable and volatile requirements.  
 Apply versioning principles to requirement s documents.  
 Establish traceability and ownership of requirements.  
 Use CASE Tools for requirements management.  
 Act as an effective member of a team involved in eliciting and 
recording user requirements for an Information System.  
 Apply a range of elicitatio n techniques effectively.  
 
A4.01  New technology opportunities and the matching of these To 
  business needs  [ 4 ] 
 Analyse business processes and compare them against alternative 
solutions proposed by standard software packages ("best practice" 
approach).  
 Evaluate various options for the "virtual organisation" within a 
business scenario.  
 Establish a business case for moving from a "segregated" sales 
and marketing strategy to the "unique customer" approach in a 
given organisation.  
 Produce a report on the eff ects of globalisation for an organisation.  
 Evaluate the Internet as a tool for creating new opportunities for an 
organisation.  
 Evaluate extranets as a tool for achieving efficiencies in 
customer/supplier interaction.  
 Produce an impact analysis for an organ isation related to the 
increased use of e -business mechanisms.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 5 of 16 
 
 Evaluate a project which used IT as the enabler for significant 
business change.  
 Produce a report documenting the major features of Customer 
Relationship Management tools.  
 Compare the features offered by two major Supply Chain 
Management packages.  
 Evaluate the case for using Enterprise Resource Planning tools for 
a given business scenario.  
 Compare the strengths and weaknesses (from a business 
viewpoint) of developments in IT technical architectu res (e.g. web 
based vs. "2 tier" client server).  
 Evaluate the case for using Document Management systems.  
 Evaluate the benefits of Knowledge Management systems.  
 Evaluate the benefits and potential of implementing social media 
for customers, suppliers or st aff. 
 Evaluate the potential of tools to exploit portable devices through 
functions like virtual shops, geolocation of physical points of sale.  
 Evaluate the advantages, disadvantages of cloud computing.  
 
C1.02  Distributed comput ing architecture [  2 ] 
 Evalua te and design the physical architecture of a data centre / 
server farm.  
 Know how to integrate a mainframe with other infrastructures and 
associated integration issues.  
 Evaluate the solution offered by Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 
providers.  
 Define th e appropriate hardware dimensioning for servers in a 
farm, considering actual and expected workload , and taking into 
account their role (web server, database server, application server, 
terminal server, monitoring server, …).  
 Design an appropriate organis ation of physical servers and 
evaluate the benefits of virtualisation and modular blade servers.  
 Evaluate the environmental characteristics of a server farm 
(conditioning, cabling, physical access control, ...) and all 
components used, such as uninterrupte d power supply systems, 
racks etc.  
 Apply principles of green IT in the design, manufacture, use, and 
disposal of computers, servers, and associated subsystems, in 
order to minimize the impact on the environment.  
 Know how to obtain high availability (cluste ring, load balancing, ...) 
and identify related hardware / software requirements.  
 Manage the infrastructure  portfolio and evaluate, based on 
required performance and allocated budget, the best shared 
storage solution, including number and capacity of disks , required 
redundancy, external communication bus capacity.  
 Identify scalability options to align the sizing of a data centre / 
server farm to the expected requirements, and assess their 
economic feasibility.  
 Define backup and recovery policies for data an d applications, 
aligning them to the agreed service level.  
 
A7.02  Business risk and IT security [ 1,5 ]  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 6 of 16 
 
 Specify the business need for recovery and back -up of data and 
for protection against viruses.  
 Evaluate the need for encryption of data (at rest/in tran sit) in the 
light of network "threats" to data integrity.  
 Evaluate the risks to the business caused by security threats to 
IS/IT.  
 Contribute to a Security policy for (part of) a business organisation.  
 
Incisive  competence level  [ 18,5 ] 
A2.01 Information Systems in the business environment  [ 1 ]  
 Explain the nature of Management Information in the planning and 
control of organisations.  
 Define the strategic role of Information Systems (IS).  
 Demonstrate a detailed understanding of common business 
functions.  
 Describe why an IS Strategy is needed.  
 Contribute to the development of an IS Strategy.  
 Relate IS Strategy to Business Strategy.  
 Recognise the role of a structured approach to IT service 
management like ITIL in improving the alignment between IT and 
the bus iness needs.  
 
A1.03  Organisational strategies and related IT system selection [ 1 ]  
 Classify organisations based on their type, internal structure, legal 
status etc.  
 Evaluate the role IT plays in different types of organisation.  
 Evaluate the impact of diff erent organisational structures on the 
management of IT.  
 Evaluate Corporate Mission Statements and their IT implications.  
 Build a business plan for a particular organisation.  
 Evaluate the major techniques for building a business strategy.  
 Involve functiona l managers and key users to identify the key 
business needs  
 Propose new technical & organizational tools to improve office 
automation and productivity (e -mail, document/content 
management, cooperative workflow with external partners)  
 Identify IT solutions for factory automation  
 Outline the IT needed to deliver a given business plan.  
 Select a portfolio of computer support tools for management of an 
organisation.  
 Contribute to an overall strategy for leveraging of organisational 
knowledge, memory and learning . 
 Use well -known decision making and problem solving techniques.  
 Select suitable Management Information Systems (MIS) software 
for an organisation.  
 Evaluate the usefulness of different IT -based workflow systems.  
 Compare the effectiveness of virtual team wo rking and physically 
co-located team working.  
 Establish a collaborative structure, using relevant technology.  
 Evaluate implementations of collaborative technologies.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 7 of 16 
 
 Evaluate the potential of internal social networks for strengthening 
staff relationships, particularly in distributed organisations.  
 Contribute to the implementation and communication of effective 
policies regarding corporate responsibility (as defined by standards 
like ISO 14001), including social and environmental sustainability 
and some spec ific actions such as design for all, green IT, 
stakeholder involvement through social networks.  
 Evaluate the link between an IT strategy and the business 
strategy.  
 Design appropriate matches between organisational need and IT 
provision.  
 Identify the streng ths and weaknesses of MIS, On -line Transaction 
Processing (OLTP) and related system types.  
 Contribute to the specification of a Data Warehousing system to 
support Business Intelligence (analytics) users.  
 
 
A1.01  Business activity and business process modelling [ 1,5 ]  
 Understand the Rationale for Business Activity Modelling.  
 Perform Internal Environment Analysis (e.g. MOST).  
 Perform External Environment Analysis (e.g. PESTLE).  
 Use SWOT Analysis.  
 Perform Business Viewpoint Analysis.  
 Define Business Activitie s for an organisation.  
 Define CSFs and KPIs for a business change.  
 Formalise Business Rules within an organisational unit.  
 Define Information Support needed for the defined activities.  
 Perform conflict resolution between perspectives.  
 Create Rich Pictures to describe a business scenario.  
 Utilise the Soft Systems Approach to developing an Information 
System.  
 Evaluate alternative ways of modelling business processes; e.g. 
Data Flow Diagrams, PHD, Process Dependency, Event Models.  
 Conform to the syntax of busi ness process modelling.  
 Document Information flows (sources, destinations).  
 
A6.01  Managing business change [ 1 ]  
 Develop a communication plan to facilitate organizational changes  
 Foster  innovation by an appropriate evaluation system for IT staff  
 Promote t raining to facilitate the change  
 Identify organizational and technological drivers of resistance to 
change  
 Understand human behaviour and its impact on business change  
 Create a plan to overcome resistance to change from the 
business, including “selling” th e benefits of new technology  
 Make effective use of Audio -Visual tools in making the case for 
change within an organisation  
 Explain to non -IT staff the role of IT in achieving corporate aims, 
and its place within the organisation  
 Ensure that the case for ch ange is presented effectively, using 
modern delivery techniques  
 Evaluate the Impact of an IT solution on the Business, its 
Customers/Suppliers, Staff, Internal processes etc  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 8 of 16 
 
 Select between Programmes and Projects for Business Change  
 Organise the delivery o f user training for both new business 
processes and the use of any underpinning ICT services  
 Control the interfaces between Business Change projects and 
enabling IT projects  
 Identify cultural, organisational and business constraints affecting 
options for c hange  
 Establish an understanding of business aims and develop 
alternative processes to achieve them  
 Assess the risks, costs and potential benefits of alternative 
business process designs.  
 
C3.01  Network principles and standards [ 1,5 ]  
 Evaluate the basic c omponents of a network, such as server, 
client, NIC, protocols, Network Operating System (NOS), shared 
resources.  
 Evaluate a Server, its requirements, and function. Also evaluate 
the basic server components.  
 Build or order a server, dimensioning it to cove r the network needs.  
 Evaluate a client, its requirements, and function. Also evaluate the 
basic client components.  
 Build or order a client, dimensioning it to covers both user’s and 
applications’ needs.  
 Configure computers and mobile devices for data synch ronization . 
 Evaluate the function of a Network Interface Card (NIC). Also be 
able to choose the appropriate card for a network.  
 Differentiate between the basic network topologies:  
o Busnet  
o Ringnet  
o Starnet  
o their function, capabilities and limitations  
 Differen tiate between a Local Area Network (LAN) and a Wide 
Area Network (WAN).  
 Recognise “de facto” and “de jure” standards in data transmission:  
o the TCP/IP suite  
o the OSI model  
o purpose of the layered reference model (principle of 
encapsulation and service access points in layer models)  
o main standard organisations, such as CCITT, ITU -TS, IEEE, 
ISO and IAB and domains they are focusing on  
o aim of the different layers (physical, data link, network, 
transport, session, presentation, and application . 
 
C1.01  Computer hardware selection and management  [ 1 ] 
 Recognise CPU architectures and functioning, and evaluate how 
their characteristics affect performances.  
 Evaluate caching policies and the respective hardware 
configurations.  
 Differentiate between CPU architectures (CIS C, RISC, 32/64 bit, 
and extensions on specific functions e.g. SSE), their main 
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 9 of 16 
 
manufacturers and the application context where they are most 
suitable.  
 Differentiate between RAM types (DRAM, SRAM, DDR -X, and 
extensions on specific functions e.g. ECC), the m eaning of 
characteristic parameters (CAS, Command Rate, tRP, tRAS, ...), 
their main manufacturers and the application context where they 
are most suitable.  
 Differentiate between hard disk types (IDE, various kinds of SCSI, 
S-ATA), the meaning of characteri stic parameters (RPM, on -board 
cache) and the application context where they are most suitable.  
 Evaluate hardware requirements for a server during the 
procurement phase, define its configuration and choose the 
appropriate components.  
 Differentiate between disk controller types (SCSI, Fiber Channel, 
ATA) and their functions (read/write caching, supported RAID 
levels, hot -plug support, spare disks support, ...).  
 Tune all low level configuration parameters for the main 
components, maximizing performances.  
 Supe rvise the proper working conditions of hardware components 
and identify upgrades that can improve performances.   
 
B2.01  Information modelling techniques and tools [ 1 ]  
 Investigate existing systems and define elements of logical data 
design for required sy stems.  
 Contribute to schema definition for a given business scenario.  
 Use both top down and bottom up modelling of data.  
 Use entity relationship modelling or class modelling to outline the 
information requirements of a new business system.  
 Use recognised e ntity modelling techniques to construct a data 
model reflecting the business needs of the organisation.  
 Contribute to data key identification and design.  
 Assist in the creation of a Data Catalogue.  
 Understand the concepts of RDA.  
 Validate data models from a business processing perspective.  
 Specify the requirements for security and integrity of data in a 
business scenario; requirements should cover integrity, loss of 
data consistency, logical errors, system errors, hardware failures, 
human error.  
 
B1.01  Syst em development lifecycles [ 1,5 ]  
 Understand the differences between Business Analysis, Systems 
Analysis and Systems Design.  
 Investigate and document an existing system.  
 Produce a requirements definition for a business system.  
 Create Business System Option s and present them to the 
business.  
 Identify tasks/disciplines involved in management of systems 
development.  
 Justify the use of a specific systems methodology.  
 Use relevant (to Business and Systems Analysis) development 
techniques.  
 Explain the lifecycle o f a project to business users.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 10 of 16 
 
 Use formal approaches for ensuring best practice in the System 
Development process.  
 Understand the rationale for a particular Systems Development 
(SD) method and where it is used.  
 Appreciate the scope and limitations of SD me thod in the project 
lifecycle.  
 Understand and work within a standard development framework 
(e.g. SSADM).  
 Appreciate the need for specific techniques in the SD process.  
 Evaluate the suitability of differing system development 
approaches for a particular pro ject scenario.  
 Harmonise roles and responsibilities of the various specialists in 
each of the main lifecycles for system development.  
 Use well known approaches to providing detailed SD Lifecycle 
products, e.g. textual, diagrams, prototypes.  
 Create differen t modelling views of a business system (e.g. static 
data, behaviour, user centred, process).  
 
A4.02  Package selection and implementation lifecycle [ 1 ]  
 Define a framework for effective package selection.  
 Identify, investigate and assess potential package suppliers.  
 Evaluate a software package against defined requirements.  
 Present recommendations concerning the "fit" of the software 
package to agreed functional and non functional requirements.  
 Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of the package 
approac h. 
 Evaluate the human, technical and financial implications of a 
decision to outsource development/buy a package solution.  
 Apply a checklist of factors to a decision on in house development 
vs. package procurement.  
 Work within a framework for package selec tion. 
 Understand the impact on package selection of Prototyping 
approaches.  
 Acquire an understanding of the software package market in a 
particular business context.  
 Produce a High Level Functional Model for a system.  
 Contribute to identifying potential pa ckage suppliers.  
 Contribute to the production of Invitations to Tender (ITTs) and 
questionnaires.  
 Investigate suppliers.  
 Assist in the creation of Supply Contracts and Support 
Agreements.  
 Perform cost comparisons - purchase and support.  
 Document the functi onal match of a package solution.  
 Contribute to gap analysis for a package selection.  
 Use a weighted scorecard approach to evaluation.  
 Present the recommendation for a specific package solution.  
 Assist in the implementation of packages.  
 Liaise with procure ment staff for package purchase.  
 Define the modified business processes required in a package 
solution.  
 Appreciate the issues with tailoring the package software.  
 Contribute to long term supplier management.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 11 of 16 
 
 Appreciate the advantages/disadvantages of packa ges. 
 
B1.02  User centred analysis and development [ 1 ]  
 Analyse and contribute to the design of Information Systems which 
reflect the way users wish to work to support their business.  
 Perform user analysis and establish usability criteria, which can be 
used to measure the success of new systems.  
 Model business tasks and use these models as a basis for 
prototyping and user interface design.  
 Use User Analysis, Work Practice Models, Task Modelling, Job 
Design, or equivalent techniques.  
 Appreciate the role of U ser Centred techniques in System 
Development.  
 Perform Work Practice Modelling using concepts such as actor, 
task, business event, task scenario, user role, user class, user  
object, common subtask.  
 Map Business Activities onto the organisational structure.  
 Create required task models, plans and scenarios.  
 Contribute to identifying and specifying task supporting IT software 
functions.  
 
B1.03  RAD approaches to the system development lifecycle [ 1 ]  
 Understand key features of Rapid Application Development 
(prototyping, iteration, incremental development/delivery, user 
involvement, empowerment, timeboxing, and prioritisation).  
 Apply key principles and Critical Success Factors for RAD projects.  
 Define the actors in a RAD project.  
 Understand the SD Lifecycle for a RAD approach.  
 Work within a standard RAD framework like Dynamic Systems 
Development Method or other agile methodologies.  
 Evaluate Prototyping Approaches and Opportunities.  
 Appreciate the different types/purposes of Prototyping.  
 Perform business and IS Mode lling in RAD projects.  
 Use Facilitation skills and obtain consensus.  
 Contribute to testing in RAD projects.  
 Assist the Project Manager in managing RAD risks.  
 Contribute to Estimating and Timeboxing Management in RAD.  
 Define the principles, advantages and d isadvantages of the RAD 
approach.  
 Describe different approaches to prototyping and explain where 
each approach might be applied.  
 Identify key factors in the success of a Facilitated Workshop.  
 Describe a framework for managing a RAD team, using a chosen 
methodology like SCRUM. . 
 Contribute effectively to a RAD team.  
 Identify appropriate applications for the RAD approach within an 
organisation.  
 
B3.05   Principles of testing [ 1,5 ]  
 Explain the principles of Testing.  
 Maintain the importance of Testing in the Li fecycle.  
 Understand Dynamic Test Techniques.  
 Apply Test Management Standards.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 12 of 16 
 
 Use Static Testing Techniques.  
 Understand core testing terminology (e.g. Expected Results, 
Expected Information).  
 Appreciate the economics of Testing.  
 Perform High Level Test Pla nning.  
 Organise User Acceptance Testing (UAT).  
 Ensure Functional and Non -Functional UAT is completed.  
 Contribute to Dynamic Testing (Black Box).  
 Contribute to Test Management (e.g. organisation, estimating, 
resourcing).  
 
A5.02  Estimating for system develop ment [ 1 ]  
 Use a variety of estimating approaches and apply them to a 
practical project.  
 Understand the importance of estimating and measurement.  
 Distinguish between top -down and bottom -up estimating.  
 Contribute to "estimating by analogy".  
 Contribute to De lphi estimating.  
 Contribute to estimating by the analysis percentage effort method.  
 Appreciate the principles of Function Point Analysis (FPA).  
 Appreciate the benefits of using the COSMIC software sizing 
method.  
 Contribute to FPA estimates by using formal counting rules.  
 Assist in defining effort estimates and elapsed duration estimates.  
 Appreciate the use of Line Count Cost Models.  
 Contribute to building Work Breakdown structures and hence 
estimating for software development projects.  
 Appreciate the impact  of timeboxing and RAD on estimating.  
 Appreciate the principles of the Story Points method for estimating 
effort when applying agile software development approach.  
 Evaluate the factors affecting productivity in IS development.  
 Contribute to collecting and analysing project statistics/metrics.  
 Contribute to the use of metrics to improve project estimation.  
 
C7.01  IT service delivery [ 1 ]  
 Contribute to the creation, via cost -based negotiation, of Service 
Level Agreements by stating business quality requireme nts for the 
specified service.  
 Contribute to the organisational Capacity Plan by eliciting 
predictions of service usage (both existing and planned).  
 Contribute to the Business Continuity Plan for an organisation, by 
specifying threats to and the recovery n eeds of each service 
offered by the organisation to its customers.  
 Evaluate risk reduction and contingency options prepared by 
Service Management staff within an organisation.  
 Contribute to Continuous Service Improvement plans on behalf of 
the business.  
 Evaluate the various options for Service Desk support suggested 
by IT Service Management.  
 Ensure full support for new services is in place before system 
implementation is completed.  
 Liaise with Service Management staff over the technical impact of 
requested business changes to existing services.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 13 of 16 
 
 Contribute to business impact analysis of all requests for change to 
a service.  
 Assist the business in specifying requests for change to existing 
services using ITIL© - ISO20000 standards or equivalent. . 
 
B1.04  Tools and techniques for development, testing and 
 implementation of IT systems [ 1 ]  
 Use system development tools for business modelling, 
requirements management and acceptance testing.  
 Use relevant tools for automated testing (e.g. CAST).  
 Use tools to support systems implementation and testing (e.g. 
rollout tools).  
 Use relevant tools to perform security code review.  
 Take responsibility for "end user" training and support 
documentation.  
 Collaborate with Service Management to establish a user support 
structure (e .g. IT Service Desk).  
 
A5.01  Project Management essentials [ 1,5 ]  
 Define the role of the various specialists in a typical project 
organisation structure (e.g. Rational Unified Process, PRINCE2, 
etc.).  
 Contribute to the IS project plan for a given business  scenario.  
 Contribute to risk analysis of a project proposal, concentrating on 
business risk.  
 Use standard approaches to evaluate a project plan from the 
business viewpoint.  
 Assist in defining  the phases within a project and the role of the 
business analys t in those phases.  
 Assist in the creation of constraints and the definition of 
milestones, checkpoints and reviews for a project.  
 Define Corporate Standards for the documentation of business 
analysis deliverables in a project.  
 Contribute to quality assuran ce processes within a project, from a 
business perspective.  
 Be aware of IS Agile Project Management (APM) principles and 
techniques like SCRUM and XP.  
 
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 14 of 16 
 
Annex: External references to Frameworks and Schemes  
European e -Competence Framework (e -CF) version 2. 0 by 
CEN 
This is a  reference framework of 36 ICT competences that can be used and 
understood by ICT user and supply companies, the public sector, educational, and 
social partners across Europe. One of the strategic objectives of EUCIP is to provide 
a detai led competence scheme that sits under and references the competences set 
out in the e -CF in order to provide a range of certifications and services to IT 
professionals and industry in Europe.  
A.1: IS and Business Strategy Alignment  
“Anticipates long term b usiness requirements and determines the IS model in line 
with organisation policy.  Makes strategic IS policy decisions for the enterprise, 
including sourcing strategies .” 
A.4: Product or Project Planning  
“Analyses and defines current and target status. Est imates cost effectiveness, points 
of risk, opportunities,  strengths and weaknesses, with a critical approach. Creates 
structure plans; establishes time scales and  milestones. Manages change requests. 
Defines delivery quantity and provides an overview of ad ditional  documentation 
requirements. Specifies correct handling of products. ” 
A.5: Architecture Design  
“Specifies, refines, updates and makes available a formal approach to implement 
solutions, necessary to  develop and operate the IS architecture. Manages the 
relationship with the business stakeholders to ensure  that the architecture is in line 
with business requirements. Identifies the need for change and the  components 
involved; hardware, software, applications, processes, information and technology 
platform. Ensures that all aspects take account of interoperability, scalability, usability 
and security. ” 
A.7: Technology Watching  
“Explores latest ICT technological developments to establish understanding of 
evolving technologies.  Devises innovative solutions  for integration of new technology 
into existing products, applications or  services or for the creation of new solutions. ” 
A.8: Sustainable Development  
“Estimates the impact of ICT solutions in terms of eco responsibilities including 
energy consumption.  Advises business and ICT stakeholders on sustainable 
alternatives that are consistent with the business  strategy. Applies an ICT purchasing 
and sales policy which fulfils eco -responsibilities. ” 
SFIA© version 4G by the SFIA Foundation  
The Skills Framework for  the Information Age (SFIA) provides a common reference 
model for the identification of the skills needed to develop effective Information 
Systems (IS) making use of Information Communications Technologies (ICT). It is a 
simple and logical two -dimensional framework consisting of areas of work on one 
axis and levels of responsibility on the other.  
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 15 of 16 
 
Skill 9: Consultancy  
“The provision of advice, assistance, and guidance in any area associated with the 
planning, procurement, provision, delivery, management, mai ntenance or effective 
use of information systems and their environments. Can deal with one specific aspect 
of IT and the business, or can be wide ranging and address strategic business 
issues . ” 
Skill 10: Technical Specialism  
“The management of, and provis ion of expert advice on a specific technical 
specialism. Examples of specialism can be any technology, technique, method, 
product or application area . ” 
Skill 11: Research  
“The advancement of knowledge in one or more fields of IT by innovation, 
experimenta tion, evaluation and dissemination, carried out in pursuit of a 
predetermined set of research goals .” 
Skill 17: Solution architecture  
“The development and communication of structural frameworks (hardware, software 
and other components) which meet the prese nt and future requirements of an 
organisation, and the interrelationships between these components. The design of 
solutions required to automate business processes and resolve business issues in a 
particular business or functional area. The provision of di rection and guidance on all 
technical aspects of the development of, and modifications to, information systems to 
ensure that they take account of relevant architectures, strategies, policies, 
standards and practices and that existing and planned systems a nd IT infrastructure 
remain compatible . ” 
Skill 18: Emerging Technology Monitoring  
“The identification of new and emerging hardware, software and communication 
technologies and products, services, methods and techniques and the assessment of 
their relevanc e and potential value as business enablers, improvements in 
cost/performance or sustainability. The promotion of emerging technology awareness 
among staff and business management . ” 
Skill 37: Requirements definition and management  
“The definition and manag ement of the business goals and scope of change 
initiatives. The specification of business requirements to a level that enables effective 
delivery of agreed changes . ” 
Skill 38: Systems Design  
“The specification and design of information systems and the de sign or selection of 
components to meet defined business needs, retaining compatibility with enterprise 
and solution architectures, conforming to corporate standards, within constraints of 
cost, security and sustainability . ” 
 
EUCIP Professional  Profile Specification  Copyright 
  2011 ECDL Foundation  Page 16 of 16 
 
Italian “Borsa Lavoro” scheme  
Denominazione 
Figura 
Professionale   
Analista sistemista  
 
Finalità  E’ responsabile della gestione, manutenzione ed esercizio 
dei sistemi informativi dell’organizzazione all’interno della 
quale opera. Identifica esigenze organizzative e di 
gestione delle i nformazioni, pianifica e controlla progetti di 
miglioramento dei sistemi ICT, garantisce una buona 
operatività del sistema informativo nel rispetto dei requisiti 
di legge e di qualità validi nel contesto in oggetto.  
AITTS by the German Government – 
Arbeit sprozessorientierten Weiterbildung in der IT -Branche  
Profil 1.2: IT Systems Developer  (IT-Systemplaner/in ) 
“ IT Systems Developer entwerfen IT Systeme, definieren Anforderungen an die 
Systemkomponenten, begleiten  deren Konstruktion und Prüfung, planen und 
verantworten die Integration der Systemkomponenten zum  System sowie die 
Prüfung der Integrationsprodukte. ” 
Nomenclature 20 10 by CIGREF  
(club informatique des grandes entreprises françaises)  
Métier 1. 2: Urbaniste des systèmes d’information  
“Il garantit l’é volution cohérente de l’ensemble du système d’information dans le 
respect des objectifs de l’enter prise, du domaine fonctionnel et des contraintes 
externes et internes (de risques, de co ûts, de délais...) et en exploitant au mieux les 
possibilités de l’éta t de l’art en relation avec l’architecture technique .” 
 
