Whitepaper
                       © Strategyn, LLC
Accelerated growth. Delivered.™
The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth 
Strategy Matrix
by Anthony W. Ulwick and Perrin Hamilton 
A jobs-to-be-done lens brings into focus a growth strategy framework that explains when and 
why new products and services win or fail in the marketplace.
Contents
Establishing the theory  .......................................................................................................................................... 3
The Jobs-To-Be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  ....................................................................................................... 5
Employing the Five Growth Strategies  ................................................................................................................... 7
Employing a Differentiated Strategy  ................................................................................................................ 7
Employing a Dominant Strategy  ..................................................................................................................... 8
Employing a Disruptive Strategy  ..................................................................................................................... 8
Employing a Discrete Strategy  ...................................................................................................................... 10
Employing a Sustaining Strategy  ................................................................................................................... 10
Conclusion  .......................................................................................................................................................... 11
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  2Predicting which products and services will win in the marketplace has long been a challenge. While the ideas 
of failing fast and pivoting are popular, they have not led to improvements in the success rate of new product 
launches. Traditional innovation practices, while attempting to be customer-centric, are clearly product-centric 
and fail to reveal the customer insights a company needs to mitigate risk when enhancing existing products and 
creating new ones. Indeed, many believe predicting the success of a new offering with any degree of precision is 
next to impossible. We think differently. 
Over the past 24 years, we have studied the dynamics of product and service innovation while producing 
successful innovation strategies in hundreds of markets for dozens of Fortune 500 companies1.  Over the course of 
these engagements, we have developed a framework that explains what causes new product and service offerings 
to win or fail in the marketplace and that can be used proactively to formulate and pursue a winning growth 
strategy.
Our framework is built upon “jobs-to-be-done” theory, the fundamental notion that people buy products and 
services to help them get a job done. When we use a jobs-to-be-done lens to examine product successes 
and failures, we observe the same phenomenon time and time again: new products and services win in the 
marketplace if they help customers get a job done better and/or more cheaply. 
This simple observation led to the discovery and classification of five unique growth strategies companies can 
adopt in the quest to win in a market. It also resulted in the creation of the jobs-to-be-done growth strategy 
matrix, a framework that illustrates when and how these strategies should be used. With this framework, 
companies can understand their past successes and failures and can adopt a strategy to create winning products 
and services in the future.
1 In 2010, Strategyn engaged an independent researcher to compare the success rates of traditional innovation methods with Strategyn’s own 
innovation process, Outcome-Driven Innovation (ODI). The results show that 86% of the products and services launched by Strategyn clients 
using ODI were a success.
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  3Having recognized that new products and services win when they get a job done better (see sidebar) and/or more 
cheaply, we set out to transform this insight into a predictive framework for growth. We began by categorizing 
the possibilities using the matrix shown in Figure 1. The matrix suggests that companies can create products and 
services that are (1) better and more expensive, (2) better and less expensive, (3) worse and less expensive, and (4) 
worse and more expensive. 
The matrix prompted us to ask what types of customers might be targeted with a product or service offering 
in each quadrant. Our experience and the work of others in this field led us to the following five conclusions 
regarding the four quadrants: 
1. A better-performing, more expensive product will 
only appeal to underserved customers . These are 
customers who have unmet needs and are willing 
to pay more to get a job done better.
2. A better-performing, less expensive product will 
appeal to  all customers.
3. A worse-performing, less expensive product will 
appeal to overserved customers  (those with no 
unmet needs). It will also appeal to nonconsumers . 
These are people whose current solutions don’t 
involve the market at all, or who are not even 
attempting to get the job done as they cannot 
afford any of the existing solutions.Sidebar: Getting a job done better
Getting a job done “better” means getting it done: (i) 
faster, (ii) more predictably (without variation), and 
(iii) with higher output, throughput or efficiency 
(without waste).  Desired outcome statements, a 
special form of need statement, reveal how 
customers measure value along these three 
dimensions. With these metrics in hand, a company 
can evaluate a product concept against them to 
determine if (and by how much) it will get a job 
done better.Establishing the theory
Figure 1. Categorizing the possibilities
Better and
more expensiveGet the job done
BETTER
Get the job done
WORSEWorse and
more expensive
Charge MOREBetter and
less expensive
Worse and
less expensive
Charge LESS
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  44. A worse-performing, more expensive product will only appeal to customers for whom limited (or no) 
alternatives are available.  This happens in unique or atypical situations.
5. Some products are “stuck in the middle” (to borrow a term from Michael Porter): they only get a job done 
slightly better or slightly cheaper. Such a product will likely fail to attract any new customers. This is clearly a 
poor strategy for a new market entrant, but it may help an incumbent company retain existing customers. 
Figure 2 places the customers in their quadrants.Establishing the theory
Figure 2. Differences in target customer type
Win underserved 
customers onlyGet the job done
BETTER
Get the job done
WORSEWin customers
with limited options
Charge MOREWin all types of customers 
(under- overserved, etc.)
Win overserved customers 
and nonconsumers
Charge LESSOnly win 
existing 
customers
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  5We concluded that each of the five situations warranted its own distinct strategy. With the goal of creating a 
framework for proactive strategy formulation, we asked, What unique strategy can be employed in each of these 
five situations?  We set out to define and name a type of strategy that would work for each unique situation. We 
chose a naming convention that built upon well-established strategy and innovation terminology and accurately 
described the uniqueness of the situation. 
The five strategies we identified address all the situations a company can face as it contemplates a product or 
service strategy. The strategies are introduced in the jobs-to-be-done growth strategy matrix shown in Figure 3.
The product/service strategies introduced in this framework are defined as follows:
1. Differentiated strategy. A company pursues a differentiated strategy when it discovers and targets a 
population of underserved consumers with a new product or service offering that gets a job (or multiple jobs) 
done significantly better, but at a significantly higher price. Examples of offerings that successfully employed 
a differentiated strategy include Nest’s thermostat, Nespresso’s coffee and espresso machines, Apple’s iPhone 
2G (first generation), the Herman Miller Aeron chair, Whole Foods’ organic food products, Emirates airlines’ 
international flights, Bang & Olufsen’s personal audio products, BMW sports cars, Sony’s PlayStation (original 
model), and the Dyson vacuum cleaner and Airblade hand dryer.
2. Dominant strategy. A company pursues a dominant strategy when it targets all consumers in a market 
with a new product or service offering that gets a job done significantly better and for significantly less 
money. Examples of offerings that successfully employed a dominant strategy include Google Search, Google 
AdWords, UberX, Netflix’s streaming video, Progressive Insurance’s nonstandard automobile insurance, and 
Vanguard Group’s personal investment services.The Jobs-To-Be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix
Figure 3. The Jobs-To-Be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix
Get the job done
BETTER
Get the job done
WORSE
Charge MORE Charge LESSSustaining 
StrategyWin underserved 
customers onlyDifferentiated Strategy
Win customers
with limited optionsDiscrete StrategyWin all types of customers 
(under- overserved, etc.)Dominant Strategy
Win overserved customers 
and nonconsumersDisruptive Strategy
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  6The Jobs-To-Be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix
3. Disruptive strategy.  A company pursues a disruptive strategy when it discovers and targets a population of 
overserved customers or nonconsumers with a new product or service offering that enables them to get a job 
done more cheaply, but not as well as competing solutions. Examples of offerings that successfully employed 
a disruptive strategy include Google Docs (relative to Microsoft Office), TurboTax (relative to traditional tax 
services), Dollar Shave Club’s razor offering (relative to Gillette), eTrade’s online trading platform (relative to 
traditional financial brokerages) and Coursera’s online educational services (relative to traditional universities).
4. Discrete strategy. A company pursues a discrete strategy when it targets a population of “restricted” 
customers with a product that gets the job done worse, yet costs more. This strategy can work in situations 
where customers are legally, physically, emotionally, or otherwise restricted in how they can get a job done. 
Examples of offerings that successfully employ a discrete strategy include drinks sold in airports past security 
checkpoints, stadium concessions at sporting events, check-cashing and payday-lending services, and ATMs in 
remote locations.
5. Sustaining strategy. A company pursues a sustaining strategy when it introduces a new product or service 
offering that gets the job done only slightly better and/or slightly cheaper. Examples of offerings that 
successfully employ a sustaining strategy are plentiful.
A company may have many products and services in one market, each employing different strategies, as defined 
above. For that reason, it is important to source examples at the product level, not at the company level. Uber, 
for example, has offerings that make use of three of the strategies: UberBLACK employs a differentiated strategy, 
while UberPOOL employs a disruptive strategy (see Figure 4). The importance of this distinction becomes obvious 
when we begin to apply the model to predict the success or failure of a new product or service.
Figure 4. Uber’s offerings employ different strategies
Get the job done
BETTER
Get the job done
WORSE
Charge MORE Charge LESSUberBLACK
“The Original Uber”UberX
“better faster cheaper
...than a taxi”
UberPOOL
“Share your ride and save”

Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  7Employing the Five Growth Strategies
The jobs-to-be-done growth strategy matrix can be used to prescribe proactive short- and long-term strategies for 
success, but to use it, a company must know whether or not there are underserved and/or overserved segments 
of customers in the target market. Without this knowledge, there is no way to know which strategy to adopt, and 
the chances of picking the wrong one are high. For example, in an overserved market, a differentiated strategy 
would likely fail, as no segment is seeking a more expensive product or service that will get the job done better. 
Conversely, in an underserved market, a disruptive strategy would likely fail, as no segment is seeking a cheaper 
product or service and is willing to make a sacrifice to get it.
The most effective way to discover whether or not there is an under- or overserved population is to segment 
a market around a complete set of prioritized customer desired outcome statements. Our outcome-based 
segmentation methodology, which for years has been part of our ODI process, was specifically designed for this 
purpose2 . 
Once a company knows where in the matrix its target customers can be found, it can adopt the appropriate 
strategies for each segment. Let us examine each strategy more closely.
Employing a Differentiated Strategy
A differentiated strategy works when a highly underserved segment of customers is targeted with a premium-
priced offering that gets the job done significantly better. This strategy results in a disproportionate share of profits 
and is the strategy pursued by many of the world’s fastest-growing and most profitable companies.
Nest, for example, a recent entrant into the home thermostat market, beat Honeywell, White-Rodgers, and other 
well-established incumbent firms with a product that was targeted at a highly underserved segment of the market, 
superior in performance, and offered at seven times the price of competing solutions ($250 versus $35). While 
capturing less than 10% market share, Nest is estimated to have captured over 25% profit share while shaking up 
the industry and putting its competitors on the defensive. 
A differentiated strategy is attractive because it enables a company to enter a market at the high end, capture 
significant profit share, and work its way down market over time to gain additional market share. This is a way 
to move from employing a differentiated strategy with an initial product entry to employing a dominant strategy 
with other products over time. A company can successfully move down market by lowering the price of its older 
products as it introduces newer and better products into its portfolio, as Apple did with the series of iPhone 
product offerings, and/or by using operational innovation as a means to lower production costs, as Uber did when 
it employed freelance drivers to supply rides in its UberX offering. 
2 Ulwick, Anthony W. What Customers Want: Using Outcome-driven Innovation to Create Breakthrough Products and Services. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2005. Print.
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  8Employing the Five Growth Strategies
Incumbents have much to gain by pursuing a differentiated strategy as they can afford to target their existing 
products at well-served or even overserved customers once their new, high-profit products are introduced. This 
puts the incumbent in a position of both profit and market share growth. 
Employing a Dominant Strategy
A dominant strategy is always the most appealing approach for a new market entrant to take because incumbents 
cannot defend against it. Our experience suggests that companies can win with a dominant strategy if they introduce 
a product or service that gets the job done (addresses the customer’s desired outcomes) at least 20% better and 
at least 20% more cheaply. This can be measured with high precision and probability when evaluating a proposed 
concept against a complete set of desired outcome statements.
Netflix’s streaming services, for example, offered greater convenience than traditional rental stores such as 
Blockbuster by making it easier to find, obtain, and consume movies. In addition, they reduced the cost of watching 
a movie by eliminating the annoying late-return fees and enabling customers to watch more content for a low 
monthly subscription rate.
We helped Kroll Ontrack enter the electronic evidence discovery market with a dominant strategy. While traditional 
competitors in this field gathered evidence manually, Kroll Ontrack created a solution that enabled legal teams to get 
the job done significantly better and more cheaply through the use of digital technology. This strategy led them to 
immediate success and market leadership that they have sustained for over a decade.
In any market, an incumbent or a new market entrant can win with a product or service that gets the job done 
significantly better and more cheaply. Incumbents are less likely to create such a product or service because it could 
dramatically cut their margins and may require an investment in a new product platform, capabilities, and resources.
Employing a Disruptive Strategy
The jobs-to-be-done growth strategy matrix confirms that Clayton Christensen, who coined the term disruptive 
innovation , was correct: companies can win in overserved segments with products that enable customers to get a job 
done more cheaply, but less well than competing solutions. Based on our model, we also agree with Christensen that 
a disruptive strategy successfully serves two customer segments: highly overserved customers (like users of Microsoft 
Word who switched to Google Docs) and nonconsumers—people who do not buy currently available products.
 
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  9A disruptive strategy works in both situations, but for different reasons. It works for current consumers who are 
overserved, as Christensen’s theory suggests, and are willing to make some sacrifices to get the job done more 
cheaply. Nonconsumers, on the other hand, are underserved: they simply can’t afford any of the solutions that are 
currently available. If a product comes along that they can afford, it will allow them to get the job done better than 
they can currently.
Christensen also correctly identified another phenomenon that occurs in the marketplace when he described 
disruptive innovation as “a process by which a product or service takes root initially in simple applications at the 
bottom of a market and then relentlessly moves up market, eventually displacing established competitors.” Seen 
through the jobs-to-be-done lens, the “process of disruption” is best described as the introduction of a series of 
products, the first of which employs a disruptive strategy that gets the job done worse and more cheaply, followed by 
a series of products that build on that technology platform, with more and more features, until the newest offerings 
get the job done better and more cheaply. (See Figure 5.) 
Although a new market entrant is more likely to pursue a disruptive strategy, incumbents have a better or equal 
chance at winning with a disruptive offering if they pursue it. The problem for many companies is that it often is a 
less profitable strategy. Proponents have to convince management that it is the right strategy to adopt to defend 
against competitors and new market entrants. Since a company is not limited to one product, it can choose, as Uber 
did, to create separate products to address over- and underserved customer segments. Employing the Five Growth Strategies
Get the job done
BETTER
Get the job done
WORSE
Charge MORE Charge LESSWin all types of customers 
(under- overserved, etc.)Dominant Strategy
Win overserved customers 
and nonconsumerDisruptive StrategyFigure 5. The “Process” of Disruptive Innovation
THE PROCESS 
OF DISRUPTION
Product V1Product V2Product V3
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  10Employing a Discrete Strategy
A discrete strategy is employed as a separate (discrete) part of an existing product strategy: with a discrete strategy, a 
company takes an existing product and sells it in a unique situation that justifies a higher price. A discrete strategy is 
best suited for situations in which a higher-priced version of the existing product would be very welcome—or where 
a captive clientele cannot object. Pursuing a discrete strategy can be very profitable.
The key to a successful discrete strategy is the ability to identify situations in which the customer, in need of the 
company’s product, has restricted or no access to it. In such a situation, the company can justify charging a higher 
price for its purchase. For example, people who are unable to cash a check at a bank because they do not have a 
bank account have no choice but to pay high fees to cash their checks at an independent check-cashing center.
 
As another example, consider airline travelers who are legally prohibited from taking bottles of drinking water 
through security. This restriction enables concessions at the gates to employ a discrete strategy, as they are now 
justified in charging significantly more for water (and many other food and beverage items) to travelers. Similarly, 
movie theaters, sporting arenas, and theme parks restrict what visitors can bring in and consequently are able to 
employ a similar strategy.
Restrictions resulting from high demand can also justify higher prices. Airlines, for example, typically charge more for 
seats when supply is tight. It should be noted that although employing a discrete strategy may hold the potential 
for high profits, it can also be viewed as exploitative by customers and result in public backlash and/or reputational 
damage as it has with pharmaceutical giant Mylan over the high cost of EpiPens.
Employing a Sustaining Strategy
A sustaining strategy is good for products or services that get the job done just slightly better and/or more cheaply. 
We define “slightly” as less than 5% better or cheaper. New market entrants should avoid a sustaining strategy, 
as they will not be offering anything enticing enough to lure customers away en masse from a favorite brand or 
product. Customers generally will only switch to a new product if it gets the job done upwards of 20% better—
which is characteristic of a differentiated or dominant strategy. Here again, using desired outcome statements as the 
basis for evaluating whether or not a product will get the job done better (and how much better) is a critical step in 
bringing data-driven decision making to the innovation process.
Sustaining innovation is a good strategy for an incumbent to follow to maintain market position, market share, and 
margins. In established markets, getting the job done slightly better and slightly more cheaply lets a company take 
share from a competitor.Employing the Five Growth Strategies
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  11Both new market entrants and incumbents can win in any market, but their success is dependent on the selection 
and successful execution of the right innovation strategy. The jobs-to-be-done growth strategy matrix can show 
companies which product strategies are best for them once they know the dynamics of their market. The framework 
is as useful for Fortune 500 companies as for start-ups, and vice versa, and makes it possible for any company to 
ensure the products and services they introduce into the marketplace will be a success.Conclusion
Whitepaper: The Jobs-to-be-Done Growth Strategy Matrix  12
Accelerated growth. Delivered.™About
Anthony W. Ulwick
Anthony W. Ulwick is the founder and CEO of Strategyn, an innovation consulting firm 
based in San Francisco, California. He is the author of What Customers Want (McGraw-
Hill, 2005),“ Turn Customer Input into Innovation” (Harvard Business Review, January 
2002), “The Customer-Centered Innovation Map (Harvard Business Review, May 2008), 
and “Giving Customers a Fair Hearing” (MITSloan Management Review, Spring 2008). 
He can be contacted at ulwick@strategyn.com. 
Perrin Hamilton
Perrin Hamiton is an Associate Practitioner at Strategyn, an innovation consulting firm 
based in San Francisco, California. He has led and supported client engagements in 
a diverse range of sectors including consumer packaged goods, energy, healthcare, 
education, agriculture, and enterprise software. He has a BA from Trinity College and is 
an MBA candidate at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He can be 
contacted at perrin@strategyn.com.
Contact 
United States
Tony Ulwick
CEO & Founder  
Strategyn
ulwick@strategyn.com
+1 415 787 2706
EMEA
Petr Salz
Director of Business 
Development
psalz@strategyn.com 
+31 40 2261800Asia Pacific
Thomas Davenport
Managing Partner
thomas.davenport@
strategyn.com 
+61 412 105 385
France & Italy
Maurizio Beltrami
Managing Partner
maurizio.beltrami@
strategyn.com
+41 79 596 34 27Germany, Austria & 
Switzerland
Martin Pattera
Managing Partner
martin.pattera@
strategyn.com 
+43 7472 65510 121

