[INTERNATIONAL JOURNA L FOR RESEARCH & 
DEVELOPMENT IN TECHN OLOGY ] Volume -3,Issue -1, Jan 2015  
 ISSN (O) :- 2349 -3585
 
 |  www.ijrdt.org copyright © 2014 , All Rights Reserved. 1 
 Resource Selection based Collaborative        
Cloud Computing  
Rakesh Kumar ER1 
1Asst. Prof  & Head, Computer Science and Engineering,  
1SAMS College of Engineering and Technology,  Chennai  
 
Abstract—The demand for scalable resources in some 
applications has been increasing very rapidly. Many 
researches are going on to create one environment 
connecting multiple clouds for scalable computing 
capabilities or for fully utilizing idle resources. By 
identifying  and understanding the interdependencies  
between Resources, Preference of users and Utilization of 
users, Utility based User Preference Resource Selection, a 
Collaborative Cloud Computing platform has introduced, 
which focus on Cloud Resources, Cloud Servi ce Providers 
SLS’s, User Preferences, and utilization of the users. It can 
achieve enhanced efficient management of resources and 
user satisfaction among distributed resources in 
Collaborative Cloud Computing. This method provides a 
environment to  point ou t its desired resources, Resources 
ability or capability, User’s Requirements and also find the 
available of the resources. Then the cloud users can able to 
know about each Cloud Resources and all details about the 
Cloud abilities, so that cloud users can choose effective 
cloud platform. In addition, this environment is scalable to 
the cloud users and Cloud Resources with the Collaborative 
Cloud Computing.  
 
Index Terms --- Distributed systems, cloud computing, 
resource management, reputation management.  
INTRODUCTION  
Cloud computing has been envisioned as the next generation 
information technology (IT) architecture for enterprises, due 
to its long list of unprecedented advantages in the IT history: 
on-demand self -service, ubiquitous network access, locatio n 
independent resource pooling, rapid resource elasticity, usage -
based pricing and transference of risk. As a disruptive 
technology with profound implications, cloud computing is 
transforming the very nature of how businesses use 
information technology. On e fundamental aspect of this 
paradigm shifting is that data are being centralized or 
outsourced to the cloud. From users’ perspective, including 
both individuals and IT enterprises, storing data remotely to 
the cloud in a flexible on -demand manner brings a ppealing 
benefits: relief of the burden for storage management, universal data access with location independence, and 
avoidance of capital expenditure on hardware, software, and 
personnel maintenances, etc.,  
 
 
 
Fig 1: Architecture of Cloud Computing  
 
COLL ABORATIVE CLOUD COMPUTING  
Cloud collaboration is a newly emerging way of sharing and 
co-authoring computer files through the use of cloud 
computing, whereby documents are uploaded to a central 
"cloud" for storage, where they can then be accessed by 
others.  New cloud collaboration technologies have allowed 
users to upload, comment and collaborate on documents and 
even amend the document itself, evolving the document within 
the cloud. Businesses in the last few years have increasingly 
been switching to use of  cloud collaboration.  
 
Cloud collaboration brings together new advances in cloud 
computing and collaboration that are becoming more and 
more necessary in firms operating in an increasingly 
globalised world. Cloud computing is a marketing term for 
technolo gies that provide software, data access, and storage 
services that do not require end user knowledge of the 
physical location and configuration of the system that delivers 

Volume -3,Issue -1, Jan 2015  
 ISSN  (O) :- 2349 -3585Paper Title: - Resource Selec tion based Collaborative Cloud Computing                                                           
 
 |  www.ijrdt.org copyright © 2014 , All Rights Reserved. 2 
 the services. A parallel to this concept can be drawn with the 
electricity grid, whe re end -users consume power without 
needing to understand the component devices or infrastructure 
required to utilize the technology.  Collaboration refers to the 
ability of workers in a company to work together 
simultaneously on a particular task. In the p ast, most 
document collaboration would have to be completed face to 
face. However, collaboration has become more complex, with 
the need to work with people all over the world in real time on 
a variety of different types of documents, using different 
device s. While growth in the collaboration sector is still 
growing rapidly, it has been noted that the uptake of cloud 
collaboration services has reached a point where it is less to do 
with the ability of current technology, and more to do with the 
reluctance of  workers to collaborate in this way. Before cloud 
file sharing and collaboration software, most collaboration 
was limited to more primitive and less effective methods such 
as email and FTP among others. These did not work 
particularly well, and so the need  emerged for a simple to use, 
yet feature rich cloud collaboration solution.  
 
It has also been noted that cloud collaboration has become 
more and more necessary for IT departments as work forces 
have become more mobile and now need access to important 
docu ments wherever they are, whether this is through an 
internet browser, or through newer technologies such as smart 
phones and tablet devices. Furthermore, cloud collaboration is 
important in a world where business has become more 
globalised, with offices an d clients located all over the world.  
 
The mainframe computing era enabled business growth to be 
untethered from the number of employees needed to  process 
transactions manually. Recently, cloud collaboration has seen 
rapid evolution. In the past, cloud col laboration tools have 
been quite basic with very limited features. Newer packages 
are now much more document -centric in their approach to 
collaboration. More sophisticated tools allow users to "tag" 
specific areas of a document for comments which are 
deliv ered real time to those viewing the document. In some 
cases, the collaboration software can even be integrated into 
Microsoft Office, or allow users to set up video conferences.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 2 : An Example of Collaborative Cloud Computing  Furthermore, the trend now is for firms to employ a single 
software tool to solve all their collaboration needs, rather than 
having to rely on multiple different techniques. Single cloud 
collaboration providers are now replacing a complicated 
tangle of ins tant messengers, email and FTP. Cloud 
collaboration today is promoted as a tool for collaboration 
internally between different departments within a firm, but 
also externally as a means for sharing documents with end -
clients as receiving feedback. This make s cloud computing a 
very versatile tool for firms with many different applications 
in a business environment. Reduce workarounds for sharing 
and collaboration on large files  
 
A 2011 report by Gartner outlines a five stage model on the 
maturity of firms whe n it comes to the uptake of cloud 
collaboration tools. A firm in the first stage is said to be 
"reactive", with only email as a collaboration platform and a 
culture which resists information sharing. A firm in the fifth 
stage is called "pervasive", and has  universal access to a rich 
collaboration toolset and a strong collaborative culture. The 
article argues that most firms are in the second stage, but as 
cloud collaboration becomes more important, most analysts 
expect to see the majority of firms moving up  in the model.  
 
OBJECTIVE  
The objective of the project is to assign the resources for 
the users based on their request. To achieve enhanced efficient 
management of resources and user satisfaction among 
distributed resources in Collaborative Cloud Computing  using 
Utility based User Preference Resource Selection  
EXISTING SYSTEM  
Cloud customers are charged by the actual usage of computing 
resources, storage, and bandwidth .The demand for scalable 
resources in some applications has been increasing very 
rapidly . A single cloud may not be able to provide sufficient 
resources for an application (especially during a peak time). In 
addition, researchers may need to build a virtual lab 
environment connecting multiple clouds for beta scale 
supercomputing capabilities or for fully utilizing idle 
resources. Resource and Reputation management methods are 
not sufficiently efficient or effective. By providing a single 
reputation value for each node, the methods cannot reflect the 
reputation of a node in providing individual  types of 
resources. By always selecting the highest -reputed nodes, the 
methods fail to exploit node reputation in resource selection to 
fully and fairly utilize resources in the system and to meet 
users’ diverse QoS demands. The Existing technique perform s 
the following steps  
 
 

Volume -3,Issue -1, Jan 2015  
 ISSN  (O) :- 2349 -3585Paper Title: - Resource Selec tion based Collaborative Cloud Computing                                                           
 
 |  www.ijrdt.org copyright © 2014 , All Rights Reserved. 3 
  
1. Integrated multi -faceted res/rep management  
2. Multi -qos-oriented resource selection  
3. Price -assisted resource/reputation control  
4. Combination of three components  
 
Integrated Multi -Faceted Res/Rep Management  
 
Assume that resource types (e.g., CPU, bandwidth and 
memory) are globally defined and known by every node. The 
resource information (denoted byIr) includes the resource 
provider’s IP address, resource type, available amount, 
resource physical location, pri ce, etc. A general distributed 
method for resource location is to store resource availability 
information in some directory nodes, and forward the resource 
requests to the corresponding directory nodes. Similarly, a 
general distributed method for repMgt is  to store reputation 
information of nodes in some directory nodes, and forward the 
reputation requests to the corresponding directory nodes. In 
the reputation system, nodes may dishonestly report the 
reputation feedback of their received service.  
 
Multi -QoS-Oriented Resource Selection  
 
After a directory node locates the resource providers that have 
the required reputation, available amount, and price, it needs 
to choose provider(s) for the requester. The final QoS offered 
by a provider is determined by a number of factors such as 
efficiency, trustworthiness, distance security and price.are 
called as QoS demands (or attributes).When choosing from a 
number of providers, most previous approaches rigidly 
consider a single QoS demand at a time. However, differe nt 
tasks have different requirements. For time -critical tasks, 
distance should be given priority. For a large computing task, 
efficiency should be the main deciding factor. Further, a 
server’s distances to different client share different. This 
means a ser ver’s final QoS for client does not necessarily 
represent its QoS for client. Also, a task or user may have 
multiple demands with different priorities. A challenge here is 
how to consider individual or combined QoS attributes, and a 
user’s desired prioriti es of the attributes in provider selection.  
 
Price -Assisted Resource/Reputation Control  
 
In managing decentralized resources, Harmony employs are 
source trading model, which is recognized as an effective way 
to provide incentives for nodes to provide high QoS and 
thwart uncooperative behaviors. In the model, a node pays 
credits to a resource provider for offered resources, and a 
resource provider specifies the price of its resources. The 
credits could be either virtual money or real money. The price 
is the amount of credits to use one unit of resource for one time unit. Consequently, in order to use others’ resources, a 
node must provide its resources to others (or pay real 
money).We take one resource type as an example to describe 
the price -assisted resourc e/reputation control scheme. A 
provider normally specifies the price of its resources 
according to the reputation value, load, and the desirability of 
the resources. Resources with higher reputations, lower loads, 
and higher demand (frequently requested) s hould have high 
prices. Therefore, in order to earn more income, each node is 
motivated to provide high QoS to maintain high reputation, 
while avoiding being overloaded.  
 
Combination of Three Components  
 
In the integrated multi -faceted resource/reputation  
management, a node periodically reports its specified resource 
prices along with its available resource amount. When a node 
needs a resource, it sends a request with its desired price, 
amount, time period, and provider’s reputation. After 
receiving a requ est, a directory node searches its directory, and 
finds all providers that have qualified resources satisfying the 
requester’s requirements. It then uses the multi -QoS-oriented 
node selection algorithm to identify the resource providers 
with the highest ov erall QoS values, and notifies the requester 
of the providers. The requester then asks its selected providers 
for resources. Based on the price -assisted resource/reputation 
control, the resource receiver pays a resource provider for the 
provided resources.  Also, nodes periodically check their load 
and adjust their resource prices accordingly, in order to remain 
highly reputed and maximize their profits, while avoiding 
being overloaded. If a node’s reputation for are source is 
increased, it has a higher prob ability of being selected as a 
resource provider. Then, it gains more opportunities to earn 
credits and can have enough credits to buy its desired 
resources. On the other hand, if a node’s reputation for a 
resource is decreased, it has a lower probability of being 
selected as a resource provider. Then, it has fewer 
opportunities to earn credits and may not have enough credits 
to buy its desired resources. As a result, nodes are motivated 
to increase their reputation by providing high QoS. The time 
period fo r the neural network model training and load factor 
calculation should be determined with consideration of several 
factors, including the performance requirement, the frequency 
of transactions, and the overhead in the system, etc.  
 
Disadvantages  
 
1.By alwa ys selecting the highest -reputed nodes, the methods 
fail to exploit node reputation in resource selection to fully 
and fairly utilize resources in the system and to meet users’ 
diverse QoS demands.  
 
Volume -3,Issue -1, Jan 2015  
 ISSN  (O) :- 2349 -3585Paper Title: - Resource Selec tion based Collaborative Cloud Computing                                                           
 
 |  www.ijrdt.org copyright © 2014 , All Rights Reserved. 4 
 2.It takes more time to analyze the user requirements and  in 
providing accurate resources which the user requires.  
 
PROPOSED SYSTEM  
 
The proposed method is a CCC platform, which integrates 
resource management and reputation management with the 
user preferences. It incorporates four key innovations:  
 
1.Integrated  multi -faceted resource/reputation management,  
2. Multi -QoS-oriented resource selection,  
3. Price -assisted resource/reputation control.  
4. User preference identification  
 
By identifying and understanding the interdependencies 
between Resources, Preference of users and Utilization of 
users, Utility based User Preference Resource Selection, a 
Collaborative Cloud Computing platform has introduced,  
which focus on Cloud Resources, Cloud Service Providers 
SLS’s, User Preferences, and utilization of the users. It can 
achieve enhanced efficient management of resources and user 
satisfaction among distributed method provides a environment 
to point out its desired resources, Resources ability or 
capability, User’s Requirements and also find the available of 
the resourc es. Then the cloud users can able to know about 
each Cloud Resources and all details about the Cloud abilities, 
so that cloud users can choose effective cloud platform. And 
this environment is scalable to the cloud users and Cloud 
Resources with the Collab orative Cloud Computing.  
 
Fig 3: Data Flow Diagram  
Advantages  
 
1.This method is an automatic system in analyzing and 
updation of the user preferences.  
 
2.It provides the accurate resource allocation what the user 
required and requested.  
 
 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  
 
Fig 4: System Architecture  
 
SYSTEM AND USER ANALYZE  
This module is the process of Work flow Management System 
(WfMS), getting the services details from several Cloud 
Service Providers (CSP) and the user requirements. Utility 
Cloud model needs work flow management system, and 
several Cloud Service Providers (CSPs), each of which 
provides some services to the users. Users submit their 
workflows to the WfMS to be executed. The WfMS acts as a 
broker between users and CSPs, i.e., retriev es the required 
information, schedules workflow tasks on suitable services, 
makes advance reservations of services and finally, dispatches 
tasks to the CSPs to be executed. Each CSP has to register 
itself and its services, so that it can present and sell i ts services 
to users. Then, the WfMS directly contacts the desired CSPs 
to query about the free time slots of the suitable services. 
Using this information, the WfMS can execute a scheduling 
algorithm to map each task of a workflow to one of the 
available services. According to the generated schedule, the 
WfMS contacts CSPs to make advance reservations of 
selected services.  
CONCLUSION  
Harmony incorporates three innovative components to 
enhance their mutual interactions for efficient and trustworthy 
resourc e sharing among clouds. The integrated resource/ 
reputation management component efficiently and effectively 
collects and provides information about available resources 
and reputations of providers for providing the types of 
resources. The multi -QoS-orient ed resource selection 
component helps requesters choose resource providers that 
offer the highest QoS measured by the requesters’ priority 
consideration of multiple QoS attributes. The price -assisted 
resource/ reputation control component provides incentiv es for 
nodes to offer high QoS in providing resources. Also, it helps 

Volume -3,Issue -1, Jan 2015  
 ISSN  (O) :- 2349 -3585Paper Title: - Resource Selec tion based Collaborative Cloud Computing                                                           
 
 |  www.ijrdt.org copyright © 2014 , All Rights Reserved. 5 
 
providers keep their high reputations and avoid being 
overloaded while maximizing incomes.  
 
To overcome this, presented a platform called Utility based 
User Preference Resource Selection . This platform involves 
A) System model and User Analyze B)Multi - QoS-Oriented 
Resource Selection C) Price -Assisted Resource/Reputation 
Control D)Utility based Resource Allocation. In this paper , 
presented a system model and user analyze. This module is the 
process of Work flow Management System (WfMS), getting 
the services details from several Cloud Service Providers 
(CSP) and the user requirements. Utility Cloud model needs 
workflow management system, and several Cloud Service 
Providers (CSPs), each of which provides some services to the 
users. Users submit their workflows to the WfMS to be 
executed. The WfMS acts as a broker between users and 
CSPs.  
 
In the future work, By identifying and understanding the 
interdependencies between Resources, Preference of users and 
Utilization of users, Utility based User Preference Resource 
Selection, a Collaborative Cloud Computing platform has 
introduced which focus on Cloud Resources, Cloud Service 
Providers SLS’s, User Preferences, and utilization of the users. 
It can achieve enhanced efficient management of resources 
and user satisfaction among distributed resources in 
Collaborative Cloud Computing. This method provides a 
environment to point out its desired resources, Resources 
ability or capability, User’s Require ments and also find the 
available of the resources. Then the cloud users can able to 
know about each Cloud Resources and all details about the 
Cloud abilities, so that cloud users can choose effective cloud 
platform. And this environment is scalable to the  cloud users 
and Cloud Resources with the Collaborative Cloud 
Computing.  
REFERENCE  
 
1.P. Suresh Kumar, P. Sateesh Kumar, and S. Ramachandram, 
“Recent Trust Models In Grid,” J. Theoretical and Applied 
InformationTechnology, vol. 26, pp. 64 -68, 2011.  
 
2. J. Li, B. Li, Z. Du, and L. Meng, “CloudVO: Building a 
Secure Virtual Organization for Multiple Clouds 
Collaboration,” Proc. 11 thACIS Int’l Conf. Software Eng. 
Artificial Intelligence Networking andParallel/Distributed 
Computing (SNPD), 2010.  
 
3. C. Liu, B.T . Loo, and Y. Mao, “Declarative Automated 
Cloud Resource Orchestration,” Proc. Second ACM Symp. 
CloudComputing (SOCC ’11), 2011.  
 4. C. Liu, Y. Mao, J.E. Van der Merwe, and M.F. Fernandez, 
“Cloud Resource Orchestration: A Data Centric Approach,” 
Proc. Conf . Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR) , 2011.  
 
5 A. Satsiou and L. Tassiulas, “Reputation -Based Resource 
Allocation in P2P Systems of Rational Users,” IEEE Trans. 
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 466 -479, 
Apr. 2010.  
6. K. Chard and  K. Bubendorfer, “High Performance Resource 
Allocation Strategies for Computational Economies,” IEEE 
Trans. Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 72 -
84, Jan. 2013.  
 
7. V. Kantere, D. Dash, G. Francois, S. Kyriakopoulou, and A. 
Ailamaki, “Op timal Service Pricing for a Cloud Cache,” IEEE 
Trans. Knowledge and Data Eng., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1345 -
1358, Sept. 2011.  
 
8. S. Son and K.M. Sim , “A Price - and-Time -Slot- 
Negotiation Mechanism for Cloud Service Reservations,” 
IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 42, no. 3, 
pp. 713 -728, June 2012.  
 
9. H. Han, Y.C. Lee, W. Shin, H. Jung, H.Y. Yeom, and A.Y. 
Zomaya, “Cashing in on the Cache in the Cloud,”  
IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 23, no. 8, 
pp. 1387 -1399, Aug. 2012.  
 
10. S. Chaisiri, B.S. Lee, and D. Niyato, “Optimization of 
Resource Provisioning Cost in Cloud Computing,” IEEE  
Trans. Services Computing, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 164 -177,Apr. -
June 2012.  
 
AUTHOR DETAILS  
Rakesh Kumar ER  was born in Kanyakumari 
District, Tamil Nad u, India in 1985. He 
obtained his B.Sc., M.Sc. M.E. M.Phil. Degrees 
in Computer Science & MBA in Human 
Resources in the years 2005, 2007,  2010 , 2012  
and 201 3 respectively. He has more than 7 years of teaching 
experience. He has presented 5 research papers in various 
National and I nternational conferences. He has also published 
more than 5 research papers in reputed National and 
International journals. He has guided several UG and PG 
students for their project work. His area of interest is Network 
Security and Wireless Sensor Networks. Currently, he is with 
SAMS College of Engg. & Tech, Chennai, India, as Asst.  
Prof and Head of the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering.  
 
