83Watch Your Step3:
82
A new economics—
nowhere is this more true than in high technology.
W. Brian Arthur
Santa Fe Institute
Super Start-Up 843:
hapter 1 gave a brief description of ventureland’s 
traditional and modern periods, noting how each 
period focused on New Paradigm Lead Platform 
chasing. It described how its home runs were scored on new 
computer and communication paradigms during the traditional 
venture period and the lead protected intellectual property, 
materials, hardware, software components and systems, and 
products that these manufacturing pioneers made. Chapter 1 also noted the shift during the modern period to a new paradigm 
(Internet) lead 
anything environment. Now the postmodern 
venture period is seeking a new high ground of action to launch the next generation of high-growth companies. Where is that 
high ground of action in this topsy-turvy creation age and 
its network economy? That is what our models in Supertech 
Camp are after—a framework for understanding how the high-
growth company creates the next new, new thing, a place in the 
lead platform of a new paradigm. This lead platform offering 
can be part product and part service—SuperScience at work. 
The traditional venture capital period’s New Paradigm Lead 
853: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
Platform formula is still alive. What is changing because of the SuperShifts 
reviewed in Chapter 2 is the diversity of factors that entrepreneurs can brew to 
create the formula. That is what this fi  rst model helps us do.
Up the Ladder
Creating New Paradigm Lead Platform technologies today begins with 
understanding the values that consumers and companies are fi  nding important 
in this network economy. Figure 3, The Value Ladder Model, depicts the levels 
of discovery of new paradigms. This model begins with Level 1, and ends with Level 5. Are you ready? Let’s walk up the ladder.
LEVEL 1—COMMODITIES
This is the basic level. Agricultural products best exemplify the nature of 
this level. True commodities are things extracted. Data and most information 
(thanks to the Internet) are now commodities. As computer and communication 
technologies become more ubiquitous in our lives, their invisibility coincides with 
their commoditization. Commodities are fungible and traded in markets, whereas 
supply and demand control prices. Venture capital itself is becoming a commodity. 
Chapter 14 discusses how this condition is affecting the venture investment 
process itself.
LEVEL 2—PRODUCTS
Using commodities as raw materials, companies make tangible things for 
customers . The industrial age taught us how. Today, only about 17 percent 
of the workforce is employed in making products. What they love to do
characterizes product manufacturers. In its pure form, product manufacturers are craftspeople.
Product Technologies 
When you mention the word product, most people think of technologies such 
as fi  ber optics, semiconductors, cell phones, modems, databases, computers, 
Super Start-Up 863:
Figure 3. Value Ladder Model
873: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
handheld PDAs, and so on. Computer and communication technologies use 
commodities like data, information, electricity, and chips to craft devices (goods). 
But client-server computing, network devices, and software (both operating and 
application) are also products. Of course, we know that the end-user computer and communication products are comprised of a bundle of sophisticated materials, 
components, software systems and applications, and devices.
Chapter 1 described the home-run technology that traditional venture 
capitalists seek—the New Paradigm Lead Platform technology. Before we wander 
offtrack here with our models, let’s get clear about something up front. It is important to understand that traditional venture capital practices will, for the 
remainder of most of our lives anyway, remain fi  xed on their preference to fi  nance 
bleeding-edge technology. Fortunately, there will be plenty of New Paradigm Lead Platform technologies unleashed by the forever innovative scientifi  c, engineering, 
and venture capital communities. For example, the premiere humancentric IT 
project, namely MIT LCS’s Oxygen Alliance, will keep those investors and engineers raised and educated in the early years of the information age busy 
thinking there is no end in sight for hard-science-based breakthrough products. 
The venture capital portfolio mix of two home runs to offset the losses of two 
so-so companies and six outright losers is likely to remain the venture portfolio 
paradigm for the traditional venture community. Notwithstanding our belief at SuperLab that the venture process system described in Chapter 15 can change the 
traditional venture capital portfolio paradigm, we expect things in ventureland 
not to change much. The lure of Mount Everest-like returns that hard scientifi  c breakthroughs promise will keep the attention of everyone who grew up with 
the venture capital paradigm.
The thin air of chasing hard-science NPLPs
As the traditional venture capital community keeps its head down “chasing 
hard science” to unlock NPLPs, they are fi  nding the air thinner and thinner on their Mount Everest. It is getting harder to breathe—there really may be a scarcity 
of oxygen in the IT adventure.
There are three reasons why this is so:
1.Tier-one fi  rms hold a superior position.
2.True NPLP technology adoption has a long ramp-up time.
3.Hard things are becoming less important.
Super Start-Up 883:
Tier-one fi  rms.  For venture fi  rms that are not tier one, meaning they are not 
widely funded and with long track records, playing in the thin air of “chasing 
hard science” is getting very tough. The long-standing relationships that tier-
one fi  rms have welded over the years with the research community and their reputations in their industry niches mean the bleeding-edge technology gets 
opted by the tier-one fi  rms. The pressure on tier-two venture fi  rms to please 
their newly acquired institutional investors with high and fast returns, coupled 
with their being bullied out of the way at the scientifi  c hotbeds, makes life for 
tier-two fi  rms almost unbearable. 
Technology adoption is long.  The
 history of discovering and commercializing 
true New Paradigm Lead Platform technologies, is a chronicle of time—usually 
lots of time. Our other models in Supertech Camp will describe and explain the 
ramp-up time the next new, new hard-science breakthroughs take before they 
become commercially feasible. The best example is the biotech model and its 
R&D, patent protection, and commercialization cycle. It is not uncommon for 
biotech fi  rms to take ten years to get a product in the market. Witness Agouron 
Pharmaceuticals in San Diego, which fi  nally got to market its fi  rst commercial 
drug, Viracept, an HIV protein inhibitor, after ten years. True breakthrough paradigms in information technology likewise have long ramp-up times. It 
took the Internet over twenty years to hit its tornado of growth. It took the 
computer itself thirty plus years before it became a main street item. The base materials, components, systems, and products that are involved in the discovery 
and development cycle of bleeding-edge technology usually takes a long time to 
develop. A good example is the humancentric IT paradigm that will probably play itself out over the next twenty years. The artifi  cial intelligence paradigm is 
still in its early market despite its beginnings as long ago as 1959 when Marvin 
Minsky and John McCarthy founded MIT’s Artifi  cial Intelligence Laboratory. The 
venture community has, until the last eight years, been able to let the academic 
community bear the responsibility for funding the gestation period of the science and R&D of New Paradigm Lead Platform technologies. However, as interest 
and competition heats up in the venture capital industry, more and more fi  rms 
are competing to get a proprietary acquisition position in the R&D community. The price tag is venture capital fi  rms’ dollars and courage, and it’s throwing a 
monkey wrench into the traditional venture investing model. In other words, for 
venture fi  rms to catch the next new, new thing they have to be prepared to invest 
earlier than they might otherwise like. A good example is the recent $50 million 
contribution to MIT’s Laboratory for Computer Science’s humancentric Oxygen 
Alliance project by the venture divisions of Acer, Hewlett-Packard, Nokia, NTT, 
893: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
and Philips. This early-investing strategy spikes up their risk factor and wreaks 
havoc on the time-value factor of their return on investment (ROI). On top of 
this, early investing exposes the venture investor to the increased cram-down risk 
from any follow-on investors.
Hard things are becoming less important. Compounding the above two 
conditions, venture fi  rms are confronted with the SuperShifts described in Chapter 2. 
There may be less value placed on the hard-science products and more value on how we use them. The more this becomes true, the more determined we see 
traditional venture capital fi  rms “chasing hard science.” Why? Because it fi  ts their 
success models, which are based on technologies that promise more power, smaller size, and higher density. When the world starts changing, it is human nature to 
dig harder and deeper into the holes we know. This is why when Eric Schmidt, 
CEO of Google, announced in late 2002 that Google would not remain a slave 
to Moore’s Law and buy the next generation of super chips, the computer titans 
were shocked. Mr. Schmidt is part of the SuperShift. Marc Andreessen, co-founder of Netscape, comments on Google’s direction of 
functionality  over power :
When I read the Google announcement, I understood exactly 
where Mr. Schmidt was going. This is a fundamental, even 
revolutionary, change in the IT world, and most people don’t 
even realize it yet. It’s going to be disastrous for a lot of the big companies out there.
1
This now brings us to our next level of value: services. It is here that tier-two 
venture fi  rms and entrepreneurs can focus their attention for opportunities. They 
have good reason to do so. It is the direction of a lot of action in the telekosm, 
and there is just more air and room to breathe. 
LEVEL 3—SERVICES
Before we all got connected and found more value in soft things like information, 
relationships, leisure, and the arts, products held center court. In those days of 
old, the differentiation of a product was another product. It has all changed. 
Telekosm has unleashed the soft stuff, and the softies are making a difference
in the perceived value of most hard products. Chapter 2, “SuperShifts,” noted 
the commoditization virus infecting the computer and communication sectors. 
There is no antidote for this virus. We need not belabor it again here, other than 
to note it well. But let’s look at other things. For example, today’s automobile is 
Super Start-Up 903:
not just a vehicle. Car manufacturers know that for every dollar spent on its cars, 
four dollars will be spent on fi  nancing it, insuring it, fueling it, and fi  xing it. Our 
old car is now a new media center and Internet node on wheels—because those 
services are important today. The technologies of telematics are booming. Ford CEO, Jacques Nassar, has announced that Ford wants to be a premium producer 
of consumer services.
2 Today, most products like an automobile are just things 
waiting for a service. Products become services when they are customized. Stanley Davis and Christopher Meyer, authors of the book Blur, describe this 
phenomenon as “productized services”—the integration of hard science with 
soft science.3 
Everyone is “. . . izing” their things. General Electric’s Jack Welch reported 
in 2000 that General Electric’s bottom line showed that services were growing 
at two to three times the rate of its products. IBM and Hewlett-Packard, two hardware heroes of the information age, are well aware that producing hard-
science stuff has been commoditizing for some time. IBM reports that 40 percent 
of Big Blue’s revenues comes from its service division, IBM Global Services.
4 In 
fact, the IT industry reports that consulting, outsourcing, and network building 
is now its biggest sector, accounting for $666 billion in worldwide revenue. The 
number of Charles Schwab’s service representatives has tripled in the last fi  ve years. Imagine, all the advances in automation and yet high-growth businesses are 
increasing their head counts in the service departments. Witness the niche-based, 
low profi  le data-center businesses being adopted as a vital revenue generator by 
the big telecos. There really is life beyond making things. When a technology-
based economy like the network economy has suffi  cient infrastructure in place, as it does today, then performing services, not producing products, holds the 
margins of profi  ts. This has not gone unrecognized by some venture capitalists, 
as evidenced by the venture capital recently secured by service-based fi  rms. Zefer (web infrastructure services) secured $48 million. Recently, early-stage companies 
like TruSecure raised $22 million, ArcStream Solutions (wireless consulting) 
raised $5 million, and Finali (outsourcing services) raised $5 million.
From customers to clients
Eighty percent of the workforce is now employed in using things (goods) to 
perform personalized and customized services for clients.  This trend is irreversible. 
Percy Barnevik, former CEO of Asea Brown Boveri Ltd. predicts that by 2010 services will make up 90 percent of the U.S. economy and manufacturing only 
10 percent.
5 Clients are willing to pay more for services than people who think of 
913: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
themselves as customers. Consumers (customers) look for bargains and discounts. 
Clients pay more and expect to be serviced accordingly. Customers stay at arm’s 
length from their vendors. Clients get very close to their providers to make sure 
they get what they want. 
When products were scarce and prices high, services used to be bundled free 
for customers. Now, products are offered free to customers and clients in order 
to win and maintain that precious and profi  table vendor-user relationship. The network economy is placing a premium on commodifying the relationship between 
vendor and user. Netscape gave away their browser software product to have a 
chance of locking itself in as the standard navigator and thus be in a leadership 
position to service advertisers and content providers. Do not be surprised when 
the humancentric IT products hit the markets as freeware and are bundled with 
subscription-based higher value, high-priced add-on services.
All services are not created equal
We pay our doctors to transform our disease to ease more than we pay our 
computer technicians to make our data program run better. Lawyers get paid more 
for their services than auto technicians do for theirs. Figure 4 shows the pecking 
order of the basic service categories and their common meanings, compliments 
of Webster. The bottom of the pecking order starts with data. Note that the once 
highly valuable and specialized data and information service-based offers have now regressed into the computer and communication sector as goods.
Figure 4. Service Values
Super Start-Up 923:
Service Technologies
When any of the basic service categories are productized, it means some 
tangible or hard-science-based element from the product realm has been added 
to it. The reverse is also true. A product, like a car, can have a service added to 
it; so, in effect, a car is really a service technology.
Hard things can get softened, and soft things can get hardened. This is the 
process behind the creation of service technologies. It requires great acumen to 
blur an offer into something that is one part product and one part service. A prime example of information technology softening into services is the recent 
trend of IT e-sourcing, or utility computing. Essentially, this is servicing users 
with a pay-as-you-use outsourced IT offer. Soft is getting even ofter. The software industry is shifting from the packaged application to the software-as-a-service 
approach. The recent web application management service model is an example. 
This is the space where Marc Andreessen of Netscape browser fame had his next 
company, Loudcloud, perched. Another example is Research In Motion Ltd.’s 
BlackBerry™ wireless handheld. Here we fi  nd a company that undertook a massive software system-engineering task to deliver a complex service that would be easy 
to use. The BlackBerry™ handhelds are falling off the vine. RIM was doubling 
its revenue and profi  ts every year as of 2002. 
Going higher
The trend for the higher values of knowledge, wisdom, creativity, and 
transformation is offering client-based self-help through a software proposition 
in order to create the best of both products and services. Another way to harden 
the soft is through licensing. A recent example is JAZiO, which has patented a 
new interface design for high-speed chip-to-chip communications. Instead of using their expertise to manufacture chips, they license their 
ideas and processes
to other chip developers. All this is called hardening the soft, and SuperScience is 
working overtime here. What is going on? Essentially, subject-matter experts are taking the “mystique of their personas” out of their offer and in its place inserting 
the content at the core of their value proposition. This content is either put in a 
license format or digitized into software and software-based systems. LeapFrog’s 
LeapPad® and the library of books that LeapPad technology platforms is a great 
example.Clients, who are used to high fees, relish the prospect of becoming merely a customer for a software product—as long as price goes down and the benefi  ts 
of the offer are delivered quickly and customized and easy to use. 
933: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
The fi  rst kind of service technology usually hardened into a content-rich 
software application is a knowledge-value proposition. The next level up in value 
is wisdom, and its content can be productized, too. A good example is a software 
program operating off a $20 million database called Merwyn, developed by Doug Hall’s Eureka!Ranch
®.   This online-enabled software provides instantaneous 
analyses of product and marketing plans. It is a high-knowledge, high-wisdom 
value proposition embedded in self-help software accessed over the Internet. 
There is higher value yet—creativity—which can also be productized. IdeaFisher ™, 
a software program developed by Marsh Fisher, co-founder of Century 21 Real 
Estate, is an example of a creative thesaurus hardened into software. 
Internet enabled
We can’t have a discussion of service-based technologies without dealing with 
the Internet. Creating Internet technologies is different from using Internet 
technologies. It’s a given that all our offers and operations should be Internet enabled. The Internet is more than just a technology and more than just a channel. 
Above all, it is a mind-set that platforms a company’s product and operational 
strategies. There is no shortage of fabulous reference material on the subject. 
We won’t take the space in this book to provide more. However, before we sign off and defer this subject to others, let’s look at an excellent model provided 
by Stanley Davis and Christopher Meyer, authors of the book Blur. Table 1 
shows their model of the “Blurred” productized offer. This model works well for testing the service technology component of an offering idea on the value 
ladder journey. Here it is:
Table 1. Attributes of “Blurred” Offers
Super Start-Up 943:
Welcome to the manufacturing world
Hardening service offerings into software applications presents a good news/
bad news scenario. First the good news. For technology manufacturers trying to 
escape the computer and communication technologies commodity pit, software 
applications may not be a giant step out of their comfort zone. This small step, coupled with the prospects of fi  nding a sweet spot of new higher-margin business 
in a higher-value proposition, should justify the innovation effort up the ladder. 
We began seeing this in the 1990s as computer and communication hardware manufacturers began embedding more and more software into their offers and 
calling it fi  rmware.
For service providers, the software strategy opens up a grand new world. 
Welcome to the network economy . Every reason for being a software manufacturer 
is available to the service provider. All the increasing returns and network 
advantages of software offerings now open up for service providers. Through careful alliancing, the service provider can maintain its core-service deliverables. 
Perhaps more important, service providers can, by hardening one value proposition 
like knowledge-based services, now have more time and resources to unlock a 
higher value offer up the ladder. Looking down the ladder and fi  nding lower-value 
product manufacturers coming up the ladder with service offerings, the service provider is able to maintain a competitive advantage and high-margin business 
by innovating up the ladder.
The bad news is this. For technology manufacturers there really is no bad news. 
The bad news for high-end knowledge-, wisdom-, and creativity-based service businesses is that software technologies infect their business operations with all 
the challenges and competitive threats shared by manufacturing businesses. What service businesses inherit here are the viruses of complexity, commoditization, 
and the demands of protecting their intellectual property. Subject-matter experts 
possessing knowledge, wisdom, or creativity now have to fi  gure out how to 
integrate the complex world of manufacturing into their offers, operations, and 
value chains. As Chapter 6, “Lead Platform Model,” will show, these software-based offerings will have to be positioned for a lead platform role if the company 
hopes for industry leadership and compelling competitive advantages. On top 
of this, the Internet is increasingly forcing software into the virtual commodity pit—since bits are becoming free. In our connected world, all service propositions 
are in danger of being commoditized through software applications and ultimately 
disintermediated over the web. 
953: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
So the result is that everyone is forced to innovate somewhere on the ladder. 
There is no standing still. Knowledge, wisdom, creativity, and transformation 
service providers are pressured to go two ways—downward on the ladder to 
productize through software applications and upward to fi  nd higher-value add-on services called personal performance systems. Manufacturers have only one 
way to go—up.
The Full Monty of Service Offerings
Technology manufacturers are in love with what they do. Service providers 
are in love with who they do it for. The customercentric service provider has an 
advantage over craftspersoncentric manufacturers. Mind you, there is no moral judgment going on here. It just so happens that service providers have no natural boundaries or limitations on their performance levels that trap so many technology 
manufacturers. Jets can get only so big, computers can get so small, and everything
 
in between is also subject to natural laws. Said another way, IT companies that pursue competitive advantage at the bottom end of the IT topography (see IT 
Topography Model in Chapter 4) will be “chasing hard science” for innovations. 
This will remain capital intensive, very risky, and home base for most venture 
fi  rms still clinging to traditional venture practices. 
Service providers, however, have only the metaphysical laws framing the 
outer limits of the form or function of their performance. So, service providers will be “chasing their customers.” The metaphysical or spiritual laws are not 
chained to any base physical sciences. The light moving down our fi  ber optics 
is indeed a bountiful display of abundance. The abundance of bandwidth is impressive. But this pales in comparison to the light moving up from our hearts 
when focused on what can be done for the clients we are in love with. And this 
is the infl  ection point of innovation in today’s economy. Service providers really have the 
boundless realm that AT&T tries to sell its communication technologies 
with. Service professionals of any technology company hold the trump cards 
for leading the innovation or corporate resurgence efforts of the company. And 
when any corporate triage is necessary, fi  nding quick ways to generate cash fl  ow is easier and less capital intensive with services than manufacturing devices and 
applications. Remember, the postmodern venture era is about show me the money 
now, not show me future values  based on future long-term category, industry, and 
partner-positioning formulas.
 Fast Company  magazine’s cover of February 2002 had it right when it 
proclaimed, “Love Is the Killer App.” It is this boundless realm of performing 
Super Start-Up 963:
more and more value—pouring more and more love and service on clients, 
which makes service providers the center stage players in the network economy. 
Fast Company’s cover of March 2003 proclaimed, “Double-Digit Growth in No-Growth Times.” Examining the article by Adrian Slywotzky and Richard 
Wise, one can pierce through their 
demand-innovation jargon to fi  nd the secret 
weapon of growth for such high fl  yers as Cardinal Health, Clarke American, Johnson Controls, and others. Service. These add-on services were based on 
customer activities around the product rather than by simply improving the products themselves.
Enhanced by digital technology, service providers use computer and com-
munication technologies as tools and platforms. These existing platforms and 
the new humancentric IT platforms will be used by service fi  rms to become 
software application providers carving deep niche plays. A good example is I-Think, a systems-based software application that systems consultants and 
knowledge workers in the organizational development fi  eld deploy with their 
clients. Service providers harden into software a current generation of once-secret expertise into digital content and move on to the next generation of 
higher performance systems to manifest even greater commitment and service 
to the clients they love. Eventually this, too, gets hardened, and the innova-tion cycle moves on and with it corporate growth.
Figure 5 shows the full model for productized services. 
The last two components of the Productized Service Model, namely 
com-
munity  and personal services , involve essentially nontechnology issues.Figure 5. Productized Service Model
973: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
The role of community
Some content is strictly form-and-function  based. For these form-and-function-
based content offers to have any scale, there has to be a demand across many 
sectors of the economy. A good example of a form-and-function content is the 
chip interface design licensed by JAZiO across many sectors of the semiconductor industry. Another is Intuit’s personal fi  nancial reporting content that has been 
adopted by Microsoft and others as the standard content format (OFX standard). 
These kind of content-based offers, when Internet enabled, usually result in a radial network between the provider and its customers—one customer at 
a time.
Other content is community based . This distinction between form-and-
function-based and community-based content  is important because a company 
does not enjoy increasing returns and market lock-in just by going on the Internet. 
Another kind of radial network is Amazon.com. Amazon is obviously Internet 
enabled, but the source of its increasing returns is different than, say, AOL or eBay. Radial networks like those of Intuit, JAZiO, Amazon, or Sale.com, and 
E*Trade are really transaction aggregators and not designed within the context 
of community. For increasing returns and market lock-in (other than through 
the costly and brutal branding process), they have to be designed to allow free interconnection for everyone in the radial network family of users. 
In contrast to Amazon.com for example, AOL is a combinatorial network, 
so it can promote communities of experience and meaning that allow people 
to connect with each other through its hub of chat rooms, hobby centers, and 
buddy lists.
The real quest by knowledge, wisdom, and creativity software technologies 
will be to create easy-to-use, functional content within cultural niches and 
enabled through a combinatorial Internet portal. Doing so will help ensure market lock-in for their offers. So the context of culture sets up the easy-to-use, 
networking, increasing returns, and virtual-community-building agendas of any 
productized service offer. Remember, culture—people sharing meaning and 
experiences—catalyzes trust, and trust always precedes commercial activity. It is 
this very fact that underpins most of the technology development challenges facing the humancentric IT engineers and designers. These technologists are realizing 
that the meaning–oriented information model of this new paradigm hinges on 
transforming information structure into information meaning. The conventions 
and standards necessary for human-to-machine interaction, automation, 
individualized information access, collaboration, and customization—the fi  ve 
Super Start-Up 983:
technologies of the humancentric IT paradigm—all hinge on shared culture, and 
this is the fi  eld of culture and community. Many key technologists have noted this 
cultural challenge. John Seely Brown describes this application of SuperScience principles to service-based technology offers this way:
The convergence of the telecosm, the microcosm, and the 
nanocosm are going to drive unprecedented development over 
the next twenty years. However, the degree of complexity in 
individual scientifi  c fi  elds requires a focus that makes collaboration 
across scientifi  c fi  elds diffi  cult. Organizations that engage in “deep 
craft” will continue to bridge this gap. Deep craft is not just about knowledge, but is also cultural as well. Culture is often what is 
taken for granted and left unspoken.6
The role of personal service systems
After the computer, communication, content, and community agendas of the 
productized service model are dealt with, what remains is the personal services part 
of the model. This is the space of action driving all the new value propositions as 
the company proceeds up the value ladder. Since the personal services component has not been hardened into any license or software application yet, the difference 
is the experience the client has with its vendor. The growth strategy for companies 
will be to unlock the expansive power of the franchise business model for this 
personal service component of the Productized Service Model.
So service-based businesses have this dual quest going on—hardening 
their value proposition into humancentric-based software and devices while experientializing the personal service component and franchising it. This takes 
us to our next level of the Value Ladder: experience.
LEVEL 4—EXPERIENCES
Commodities, goods, and, to a large extent, services exist outside an individual. 
Commerce has largely been an outside job. Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs 
has mirrored technology’s march. First, the agricultural age met people’s survival  
needs. The information age, and all its C&C technologies, have given people an opportunity to belong, as never before. Now the creation age is promising people 
intangible offerings to meet their internal needs for prestige and self-fulfi  llment,
993: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
where wisdom, creativity, pleasure, comfort, beauty, entertainment, love, and 
truth reign as the high-value agenda of choice. Our communication technologies 
have made the whole world a stage and all experience a simulation. Business is 
becoming like a circus.
When companies crank up the value proposition to provide the internal payoffs 
that people want, the companies are said to be staging experiences so that people 
can feel the difference that makes the difference . This is why the culture industries  (a 
phrase coined by German sociologists Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer in the 1930s) are the fastest growing sectors of the global economy. The fi  lm, radio, television, recording, tourist, fashion, food, personal development, and wellness 
industries, along with shopping malls, theme parks, and cyber communities are 
the leading fi  elds in our creation age. The Olympic Winter Games in Salt Lake City recently demonstrated the important role of the culture industries. Did you 
notice Steven Spielberg carrying the Olympic fl  ag in the opening ceremonies 
with world leaders in sports, politics, and science? Futurist James Ogilvy noted 
the following:
The growth of the experience industry represents a satiation with 
the stuff that the industrial revolution produced . . . today’s 
consumers do not ask themselves as often, “What do I want to 
have that I do not have already?” They are asking instead, “What do I want to experience that I have not yet experienced?” The 
experience industry is all about trading in what makes the heart 
beat faster.
7
We live in a world of information, connection, and product overload. Getting 
the attention of people is quickly becoming the biggest battle facing businesses 
today. And when contact is made, what do you want people to do more than 
anything else? To remember you. This is the differentiator that makes the difference in any offering. This is the differentiator for Ali Kasikci, general manager 
of the Peninsula Beverly Hills Hotel. Here he is in the heart of West Los Angeles 
winning all the industry awards and beating the pants off the established Beverly 
Hills hotels. How he does it is the key for any productized service offer. Here is 
his formula: “Our job is to think ahead of the customer—we invent something the customer hasn’t thought of before.”
8
Products, even productized services, without memorable experiences are 
merely commodities that quickly become part of the information landslide that 
we’re all trying to hide from. Microsoft is enticing people to buy their software 
products in their commercials by showing that you literally fl  y through the air 
Super Start-Up 1003:
if you use their stuff. Bill Gates is selling fl  ying, not computing. The National 
Football League’s premier offer—the Super Bowl—is not enough. The NFL 
now offers the NFL Experience alongside the Super Bowl. Anything to engage 
customers is how to win the game.
The accelerated learning industry noted long ago that rich experiences were 
the key to fast, integrated learning. Edutainment grew out of the accelerated 
learning movement. The recent success of LeapFrog is certainly a testimony. The Internet may provide lots of online learning for customers that need basic 
information, but clients who need to learn how to get their sophisticated 
information translated, systematized, correlated, scenarioed, paralleled, compared, 
or, in short, made valuable for the big challenges they face, need more than 
just simple answers from online databases. This really comes through personal engagement, combined with a compelling and memorable experience. Doug Hall 
of Eureka!Ranch
® stages creativity workshops and commands a $150,000 fee 
for a weekend experience. MG Taylor Corporation, and its licensee Cap Gemini Ernst & Young, stage three-day accelerated design Group Genius™ experiences 
and command upward of $200,000 for the experience. Are these high-value Group Genius™ experiences worth it? Clients such as Microsoft, Walt Disney, 
Cisco Systems, and Hewlett-Packard think so. Group Genius™ clients report 
that projects that had nine-month timelines, were shortened to three days by 
the Group Genius™ experience. Obviously, the high price for working smart and 
fast through Group Genius™ is worth it.
 Knowledge has been defi  ned as predictive information—intelligence gained 
from, and applied through, experience. The late scientist and philosopher Emmet 
Fox defi  ned wisdom as the “perfect blending of knowledge and love.”9 Love is a 
feeling and is best transferred through direct experiential contact. The experience
value level requires that clients become guests who have a staged encounter in 
order to have a memorable time. Disneyland works because everyone remembers 
and loves the time they had. This value level is all about soft science. It’s why the 
entertainment industry is one of today’s quintessential business sectors.
How do you draw a distinction between a service offering and an experience 
offering? Here’s one test: if a client or guest remembers positive feelings about 
interacting with your offering, you’ve produced an experience. Here’s another 
test, compliments of B. Joseph Pine II and James Gilmore: “If your customer or 
client pays you for the time they spend with you, then you’re in the experience 
business.”10 No feelings—no experience. 
1013: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
Experience Technologies
The personal service component of a productized service offer suggests a big 
clue about the experience factor. That’s right—turn off the lights and roll back 
the curtain. It’s performance time. 
Work is theater
Ali Kasikci thinks of his hotel as a stage, and each guest has a leading role. In 
their seminal book, The Experience Economy,  authors Gilmore and Pine assert that 
the strategy that works is theater. This rich text explores from many angles the 
challenges and tasks for creating client value from the experience factor. Here is a short to-do list for any company that wants to capture competitive advantage 
for the intangible personal service component of their productized service offers. 
C&C technology fi  rms might fi  nd this list useful in their quest for branding the 
experience of using their goods.
•What kind of engagement do you want your client to have—
entertainment, educational, escapist, esthetic, or an integration 
of all these?
•Do you want clients to be passive or active?
•What is the theme of the experience?
•Can you harmonize impressions with positive cues?
•Can you eliminate negative cues?
•Can you mix in memorabilia?
•How many of the fi  ve senses can your performance system engage?
•Can you charge for the experience with you?
•What form of customization is your focus—collaborative, adaptive, 
cosmetic, or transparent?
•How are you eliminating client sacrifi  ce and providing satisfaction, 
surprise, and suspense?
•Is your business model built around the theater model? If so, what 
kind—improv, matching, platform, or street?
•Are your operations like scripting, staging, and performing?
•Does your team know their roles?
Super Start-Up 1023:
Virtual or physical theaters?
One reason dot-com bombed was it forgot that culture precedes commercial 
activity and all real culture exists in geography. In geospace, intimacies take place 
and with it social trust. The cyberspace cowboys of the modern venture era must 
have thought their e-business virtual communities, crafted through computer chat rooms, would engender the same kind of bonding it took Sears decades 
to build.
 Geospace strategies are the antidote to the wired and unwired world’s 
temporality and superfi  ciality. For example, just because our wires or signals 
connect does not assure that we really know each other. If we don’t, we may 
not really know how much we care for each other. Any client relationship lasts 
as long as the client feels cared for. My doctors cannot hide online. They need 
to see me at least once a year and spend quality time with me. Their offi  ces and 
their performing staff better impress me that cutting-edge medicine is going on. If these two things don’t show up, my doctor’s marketing budgets better be alive 
and well. This same personal contact and sensory experience is conditioning all 
of us, everywhere and with everything we buy. For example, when we go into Starbucks we know they care for our drink by all their trendiness, music, and smells 
that carry us into the Starbucks experience. We never get the same feeling buying 
their coffee at the supermarket. The real success of Starbucks is getting people into their corner theaters where they perform their South American coffee show. 
The impression they leave lasts for at least three to four trips to the supermarket, 
where we remember to buy their coffee.
LEVEL 5—TRANSFORMATIONS  
Traditional venture capitalism has always concentrated its investments on 
technologies in Level 2—Products, and in Level 5—Transformation. Just when 
you probably thought this Value Ladder journey was getting too soft and not 
pragmatic enough, we arrive at a space of action that venture investors call home. It is at this level where we fi  nd the life-science fi  elds of medicine and biotech, 
because the promise of their discoveries is truly transformational. Transforming 
disease into ease is the highest form of value, and people are willing to pay dearly 
for it.
It is important to note that transformation should not be confused with 
mere innovation, although they both involve change. The dictionary defi  nes 
1033: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
transformation as a deep structural change, while innovation is defi  ned as just 
change . Transformation is not incrementalism or novelty. Deep-structured change 
is the great quest of all hard-science technologies. From biotech to communication-
tech, the “holy grail” is the discovery or invention of something that will cause a discontinuity to occur in the market—such as the profound transformation that 
occurred in the business market when typewriters were replaced with computers. 
How else can you explain traditional venture capitalists’ appetite for the New 
Paradigm Lead Platform offering? 
Transformation is also a proposition that people value independently from 
medicine and things. For example, religion is a great business. Why? Because it’s in the transformational business. There is nothing more diffi  cult to get, or to 
fulfi  ll, than the request to change me. It is therefore extremely valuable. And in 
our age, more and more people are aspiring to 
become something more, that is, 
to change fundamentally. Overweight people ask Jenny Craig to change them. 
Addicted people ask AA and its twelve steps to change them. Stressed-out people 
ask Rancho La Puerta to change them into serene people.
People who want to be transformed are saying to the vendor or supplier, “We 
are aspiring to change so that we can become more than we are.” The vendor or supplier thus becomes an 
elicitor for an aspirant who wants to go on a quest. 
These quests are usually long term. The long-term value of having aspirant-type clients for 
elicitors is very high. For example, our fi  rm, SuperLab, is in the 
transformation business because SuperLab promises aspiring entrepreneurs that we can ensure that their good teams and technologies will become great  companies 
by working with us—continuously.
So, service-based businesses can unlock new value propositions for their 
personal service component here at Level 5—Transformation. Here is where 
all the knowledge, wisdom, and creativity experts and their technologies fi  nd a 
home to prove just how deep their craft really is.
The client is the product
For the service-based business, exploring transformation as a value proposition 
merely notes that the customer is the product or offer. It’s not like Microsoft’s ad, “Where do you want to go today?” Instead, it’s “Who do you want to be 
tomorrow?” The client or buyer is essentially saying, “Change me.” Performance systems are not the economic offering—the offering is the client. The aspirations 
of clients focus on what they want to 
become not what they have. They are not 
changing in degree, but in kind—not in function, but structure.
Super Start-Up 1043:
Service-based businesses that deploy their knowledge, wisdom, and creativity 
technologies to change a client, don’t accomplish this through one event or 
experience. No, the personal service component is provided, even required, 
through time so that the desired change can be sustained. Think of this as being in the “ensurance” business—guaranteeing performance. Contrast this with a 
service-based insurance contract that pays out a cash payment as the offering’s 
guarantee or the concept of assurance  that guarantees a feeling.
Transformation Technologies
The things that can be used by client-aspirants are determined by the kind 
of transformation trip the elicitor service provider offers. The point here is that all kinds of C&C devices and creativity-based software can be part of 
the transformation process. The entire e-learning agenda of companies now takes on new meaning. Instead of e-learning as something companies use, it is 
instead something they offer to all their customers. Cisco recently recognized 
this and has quickly hustled an online customer-training program. To develop 
this, Cisco is partnering with over 120 special development vendors. One is 
KnowledgeNet.com, an Arizona start-up that received a $30-million investment 
from Cisco and others. 
Experiences provided by special events and extraordinary processes are likewise 
part of the toolbox the aspirant has to use on the journey. These technologies, hard and soft, need to be offered over the three phases of the transformation 
experience:
Diagnosing. The elicitor has to understand what the client-aspirant truly 
needs to become and how far away the client-aspirant is from becoming that. Diagnostic technologies in medicine are a good model for nonmedical fi  elds.
Staging experiences. Here the full spectrum of the experience realm opens 
up a smorgasbord-like array of possibilities. Knowledge, wisdom, and creativity technologies have to be integrated with rich experience-embedded performance 
systems.
Follow-through. “Ensurance” is only possible through continuity of a rich 
and powerful follow-through service. The true transformers will be those elicitors 
who care to the max. It’s all about heart, destiny, and commitment on both sides—aspirant and elicitor.
This concludes our walk up the Value Ladder. Hopefully, with each step up 
this ladder you felt encouraged about the innovation opportunities in front of us all. The stock market that began crashing in 2000 (and continues even as of 
1053: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
January 2003) is not the sign of the times for entrepreneurs and investors who 
understand that money and meaning is made in the simple context of adding 
value.
Chapter 4, “Paradigm Model,” examines the fi  rst part of the NPLP formula: 
the new paradigm part. Any layer of the Value Ladder Model offers a fertile 
territory for unlocking new paradigms of customer benefi  ts. There is an art for 
discovering new paradigms. Chapter 4 examines the fundamentals of this art. 
Before we turn to it, let’s summarize what we just learned in Chapter 3.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
Value Ladder Model—Key Points
This chapter fi  rst focused on the “thin air” of the venture capital community’s 
quest for the next New Paradigm Lead Platform technologies. The entrenched 
and highly capitalized older venture capital fi  rms have a locked-in fi  rst look at 
the new science coming out of the research community. Tier-two venture fi  rms are not so lucky. This chapter examined again the trend of the computer and 
communication sector’s hard technologies and products becoming commoditized. The antidote to this commoditization is, of course, soft things like high-value 
services, access, entertainment, and so on. These softer items of value can drive 
higher margin business. Next, this chapter segued off Chapter 2, “SuperShifts,” to 
offer a framework for how and where  to look for delivering new value to customers 
in our network economy. This framework can be summarized this way:
•Companies will be spiraling up the Value Ladder to unlock new 
paradigms of data, information, and the even softer values of 
knowledge, wisdom, creativity, and transformation values.
•These same companies, once they are in the higher value realms with 
their fi  rst servicecentric offers, will be racing like mad to transform 
their soft services into licensed property and/or packaged software. 
This digitizing will, in effect, harden their content-based offers into 
software and will be delivered over the Internet.
•We call this merger of products with services the productized service 
offer.
Super Start-Up 1063:
•Productized service offers will behave much like the computer and 
communication sector because they are Internet enabled. The most 
robust model of the productized service formula is:
Computer + communication + content + community + personal services
•The productized service model reaches its full potential when the 
Personal Service component of the formula is executed within the 
context of experience- and transformation-based value propositions. 
Twentieth-century customers are becoming twenty-fi  rst-century 
clients, guests, and aspirants.
•The old expression, what goes up must come down, will apply 
to the NPLP chasers of the network economy. Of course, once a 
knowledge-, wisdom-, creativity-, or transformation-based offering 
is hardened into a software or device, the commoditization devil 
shows up. This evil threat will force the innovative company to look 
once again up the Value Ladder and repeat the cycle of creation. 
Whoever can turn this cycle of creation the fastest will be a big 
winner. Let’s now turn to our next model and learn what a new 
paradigm is and where to fi  nd one.
1073: Value Ladder Model3: Value Ladder Model3:
