See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/294960586
The role of service-oriented architectu re as a part of the business model
Article    in  International Journal of Business Inf ormation Syst ems  · Februar y 2016
DOI: 10.1504/IJBIS.2016.074764
CITATIONS
8READS
5,810
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
Role of ser vice and dat a reuse in ent erprises  View pr oject
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Ville Alkkiomäki  on 21 A ugust 2016.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
   
    
   
    
   
    
   Int. J . of Business Information Systems , Vol. 21, No. 3, 2016  1 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJBIS.2016.074764     
 
   Accepted Manuscript, Copyright © 20 14 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd.  
Journal permits n on-commercial use after publication  for Author, e.g. Posting Accepted Manuscript 
on the Author's personal web pages and/or institutional repositories and/or subject repositories 
without embargo . [Author Agreement ] 
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
  
The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of 
the Business Model  
 
Ville Alkkiomäki  
Wärtsilä Corporation , 
P.O. Box 196 , 00530 Helsinki,  Finland , EU 
and 
Lappeenranta University of Technology,  
P.O. Box 20, 53851 Lappeenranta, Finland, EU  
E-Mail: v ille.alkkiomaki@lut.fi  
 
Abstract  
Digitalization is affecting business models of many  enterprises and 
changing the way information work is done. Service -oriented architecture 
(SOA) is one way of implementing this change, but despite its capability 
to model services on a business level, the enterprises are not able to link 
the value of the services with the related investments. This paper proposes 
the use of ontology as a tool to make service -oriented architecture an 
integrated part of the business model. Thi s linkage enables the SOA 
investments to be evaluated as a part of the value delivery  process  of the 
enterprises.  
 
Keywords:  business model, IT value, SOA, service -oriented architecture, 
ontology, case study , service identification, business model generati on, 
business alignment, ValIT, cost volume profit analysis  
 
Biographical notes:  M.Sc. Ville Alkkiomäki work s as an enterprise 
architect for Wärtsilä Corporation, where he is responsible for the 
enterprise architecture governance and development. Alkkiomäki  has over 
fifteen years of experience in the field of system integration, large scale 
system architecture s and related technologies. Originally starting out as a 
software developer in an EDI software vendor, his career is characterized 
by varying chief and  enterprise architect roles in large enterprises. His 
research  at Lappeenranta University of Technology focus on the service 
oriented architecture and the value of the reusable services for enterprises.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Introduction  
Digitalization is predicted to change t he future of employment , with forty -
seven  per-cent of the total US employment estimated to currently be at 
risk to some extent . The change s digitization will apply to educated office 
workers , as computers reduce the cost of information processing tasks 
(Frey and Osborne , 2013).  
 
The IT Governance Institute has defined a Val IT f ramework (2008), 
which provides indus try best practices  on how to create business value 
with IT investments. The m ain principle of the Val IT is that IT-enabled 
investments must  include the full scope of the activi ties that are required 
to achieve business value (IT Governance Institute , 2008). In other words, 
Val IT defines IT to be a part of the business and therefore requires that its  
value be model led as a part of the business ; there should  not be  any means 
to separate the value of IT from the business itself.  
 
In modern enterprise , a business and IT are inseparable . However,  despite 
extensive research in the IT value domain, both industry and academia are 
lacking conceptual link age between IT investments and their business 
value. T his paper proposes  an ontological approach to merge these two 
conceptually . 
 
The scope of the proposed ontology is an enterprise with one business 
model using service -oriented architecture (SOA) . The pr oposed ontology 
is applied in a case study to evaluate its applicability in enterprises .  
 
The paper’s research question is:  
- What kind of services do enterprises need and how can they be 
described to link them with the  existing concepts of the business 
models describing value creation and delivery in the enterprise 
context?  
The paper is structured as follows: the next chapter provide s a literature 
review of the existing IT value research , followed by a chapter describing 
the research process  of this paper. The next chapter proposes a merge d 
ontology of the service -oriented  business model , based on the existing 
research on business models and service -oriented architecture. The 
proposed ontology is then demonstrated and tested in the following 
chapters. Finall y, the findings are evaluated and summarized.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Value of IT and Service -Oriented Architecture  
The v alue of IT has been studied quite extensively from different 
viewpoints, but so far no ‘silver bullet ’ has been found (Schryen, 2013). A 
literature review of  194 articles conducted by Marthandan and Tang 
(2012) categorized the papers based on their scope: 82% studied  the topic 
on an organization level, 8% on an indiv idual level, 5.2% on an industry 
level , and 4.6 % on a national level. Out of these 194 papers, only one 
reports negative findings, while 104 report positive findings, suggesting 
that IT must bring some value .  
 
Marthandan and Tang (2010) ha ve identified five reasons for the 
difficulties of identifying the value of IT: ambiguous identity of IT 
busine ss value ; blurred reflection of IT business value ; misunderstood 
value realization process ; poor business -IT alignment : and complications 
from mediating factors. Another literature review (Schryen, 2010) 
combining the knowledge of 22 literature reviews of IT value , raises 
another fundamental issue , which is  that the research still lacks common 
terminology and a conceptual definition for ‘IT’. 
 
To understand how IT delivers  value, it is necessary to conceptualize the 
IT. Melville et al. (2004) list five diff erent approaches used in IT value 
research to conceptualize IT: (1) tool view, (2) proxy view, (3) ensemble 
view, (4) computational view and (5) nominal view. Melville et al. (2004)  
argue that systematic construct for IT is needed and propose a model 
based  on the resource -based view of the firm (RBV) , linking the IT as a 
resource into the value generating process of  the focal firm through 
business processes.  Osterwalder (2004) proposes  that the IT application s 
need to be aligned with the company’s business model. Moreover, 
Jeansson (2014) argues that IT does not create value on its own and  so 
proposes a  valuescape to be used as a notion to describe the identified 
value of IT, but provides no conceptual linkage between the IT and its 
value.  
 
Nevo and Wade (20 10) apply systems theory to extend the RBV model 
conceptually, theorizing that both the human and the IT resources can be 
seen as composite systems, which may consist  of either sub-systems 
considered as systems in their own right , or sub -systems that are 
elementary components. Additionally, systems may have properties 
derived from the interactions between the systems or the human resources, 
forming IT -enabled resources ( Nevo and Wade , 2010 ). In order to 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 function, these IT -enabled resources must be both comp atible and 
integrated with each other ( Nevo and Wade , 2010 ).  
 
The basis of systems theory is analogous with the concept of service -
oriented architecture (SOA) , which is a widely adopted software 
architecture design pattern , based on the philosophy of designing new 
services , compos ed of  reused existing services , to be used as a part of 
business processes to execute business activities (Papazoglou and Van 
Den Heuv el, 2007).  
 
However, a ccording to the earlier literature, using  service -oriented 
architecture in this way  does not deliver reusable services or business 
agility as promised . Instead,  successful SOA implementation requires 
several  enablers to succeed. The se SOA enablers include : better 
facilitation of IT/business communication (Baskerville et al., 20 10; 
Joachim et al., 2013; Van den Bergh and Viaene, 2012), top management 
support (Boh and Yellin, 2010), use of standards (Joachim et al., 2013), 
governance for SOA development (Joachim et al., 2013) and SOA 
competence (Joachim et al., 2013).  The main co mmon obstacles  for 
successful SOA implementations include a lack of business involvement 
in SOA development (Baskerville et al., 2010; Kokko et al., 2009) a s well 
as change resistance of the personnel (Kokko et al., 2009).  
 
Kohli and Grover  (2008) raises t he role of information as one of the key 
elements in the IT value delivery process. Service -oriented architecture 
can be used to conceptualize  the information as well with the Information 
as a Service (IaaS) approach (Dan  et al. , 2007), which decouple s the data 
and the business logic.   
 
The current research tends to agree on the need for conceptual linkage 
between business value and IT, and suggestions have already been made 
about how this could be achieved (Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2013; Yoo, 
2013) , but co ncrete proposals of such conceptual linkages are still lacking.  
 
Service -Oriented Architecture (SOA ) is used in this paper to represent  IT, 
allowing it to be linked with the existing concept of the b usine ss model  
representing the business.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Research Proces s 
Problem and Motivation  
Company Investments in SOA are not currently delivering the business 
agility as promised , and one major obstacle is the lack of linkage between 
the SOA investments and their business value. At the same time  academia 
lacks a concept ual linkage between IT and its business value.  
 
The goal of this paper is to find the conceptual linkage between the SOA 
investments and the business value they provide. To validate the 
conceptual linkage, there needs to be a way to utilize the linkage  in 
enterprises  by providing practical tools to evaluate the financial feasibility 
of the SOA investments . 
 
Design science fits into this twofold nature of the paper. Design science is 
an iterative research paradigm creating and evaluating IT artifacts 
intend ed to solve identified organizational problems, but also to add 
knowledge in the form of new theories ( Hevner  et al., 2004).  
 
The research follows  the design science research methodology (DSRM) 
proposed by Peffers et al . (2007) as visualized in the figure  1. 
1. Identify 
Problem & 
Motive
Lack of 
linkage 
between SOA 
investments 
and their 
business 
benefits2. Define 
Objectives of 
a Solution
Tool to 
evaluate both 
the benefits 
and costs of 
SOA 
investments3. Design & 
Development
Develop 
ontology 
covering both 
the business 
model of an 
enterprise and 
SOA4. Demonstra -
tion
Apply the 
ontology into 
financial
framework
with carrepair
shop example5.Evaluation
Case study6. Communi -
cation
Scholarly
publication
Tool promoted
in the 
enterprise
Possible Research Entry PointsProblem 
Centered 
InitiationObejctive
Centered 
SolutionDesign & 
Development 
Centered 
InitiationClient / 
Context 
InitiatedProcess IterationInference
Theory
How to Knowledge
Metrics Analysis, 
Knowledge
Disciplinary 
Knowledge
 
 
Figure 1 Nominal process of DSRM (Peffers  et al. , 2007)  
Objective  
To support decision making regarding SOA investments in enterprises,  the 
resulting tool need s to be understandable  both for  the businesses’  
management , but al so for the IT stakeholders to enable calculation and 
linkage of the value delivered by the SOA investments to the costs of the 
investment.  
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
  
Design and Development  
In order t o provide such a tool, it is first necessary to understand the basic 
concepts of t he business value and IT , as well as their relations , and 
thereby  to create a linkage. This paper uses ontology to define the 
conceptual relationships  between these two domains .  
 
Ontolog y can be used to  define the formal specifications of concepts , and 
it is used for  information sharing and for reusing the knowledge about 
specific d omains ( Gómez -Pérez  and Manzano -Macho , 2004) . A simple 
methodology for developing ontology involves these steps: identification 
of the purpose, building and evaluating the ontol ogy and documentation  
(Uschold and King , 1995) . 
 
In the following chapters, the existing ontology  of bus iness models 
representing the business is enhanced with a new ontology of service s in 
enterprises . Linking the key concepts of business value and SOA , 
however, requires  a rigid conceptual model of both.  
 
Demonstration and Evaluation  
To evaluate the validity of the conceptual linkage, the new ontology is 
applied by merging a service identification method with a  financial 
management framework to provide an end-to-end tool for enterprises , 
enabling them  to calculate  both the costs and the benefits  of different 
kinds of services .  
 
The tool is demonstrated using a car repair shop as an  example , which is 
tested in a case enterprise to evaluate the validity of the proposed 
conceptual linkage.  
 
Ontology of Service -Oriented Business M odel  
Traditionally , IT has been seen as a tool that supports  human worker s. 
However,  in this paper , SOA is used to conceptualize how the IT 
applications operate with the human inform ation worker to execute 
business activities. SOA can also  have the role of a tool automating the 
human worker’s access to shared business data, which can be seen  as an  
instrumental resource for their work.  
 
Shared  business data  is a new kind of resource f or enterprises  that 
provides  a fundamental difference compared to the  tangible physical 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 resources on which  we once  built our services . The data can be reused or 
cloned at almost no cost. 
 
Ontology of Business Models  
The creation of value is fundamental to any company’s success and value 
analysis, value creation and value delivery have been the three major 
themes in business and industrial marketing research on this topic  
(Lindgreen and Wynstra, 2005). More recent research has considered the 
value of the business relationships and co -creation of the value, but still 
the resources remain just as instrumental for the value creation process, 
and planning how to accumulate, combine and exploit the resources and 
related activities  to optimize the value  (Lindgreen et al., 2012).  
  
How value is created a nd delivered in an enterprise can be  conceptualized 
with the business models. Teece (2010 , p. 191 ) summarizes the concept of 
a business model as a means by which  to “describe the design or 
architecture of the value cr eation, delivery and capture mechanisms 
employed”.  
 
There are different approaches for business modelling  and the resulting 
models can have many meanings and usages . For example , they can be 
seen as recipes or role models that might be copied, a nutshell d escription 
of a business organization or as scientific models (Baden -Fuller and 
Haefliger, 2013). The s ame business model can also have many of these 
roles, which explains why the idea of a business model is so challenging to 
grasp and why scholars rarely  agree on common concepts (Baden -Fuller 
and Haefliger, 2013; Zott et al., 2011).  
 
In short, the business models can be used to describe how the firm is 
organized to distribute value, but there are still different views as to what 
‘value ’ really is (Baden -Fuller and Haefliger, 2013).  
 
Business models have gained  a lot of interest through special issues of 
management research journals recently, but the concept of a business 
model itself lacks an established theoretical grounding in economics or in 
business s tudies (Teece, 2010).  
 
There are many  conceptual business models available . One of the best -
selling management and leadership books is Business Model Generation  
(Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2012) . The book applies the business model 
ontology, which is built  on previous research and provides a rigid 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 conceptual model linking the c ustomers to the business activi ties and to 
the resources through value propositio ns (see figure  2) (Osterwalder, 
2004) .  
 
Partnership Actor Relationship
Customer Channel Value Proposition Value Configuration Capability
Cost Profit RevenueInfrastructure 
ManagementCustomer
Interface
Financial Aspects
 
Figure 2 The Business Model Ontolog y based on Osterwalder (Osterwalder, 2004)  
Osterwalder uses the concepts of value proposition and offering to 
represent the products of the compan y, or to be more precise, all that the 
company offers to its customers. The value proposition represents the 
value for one or more target customers, created using one or more 
capabilities of the company. Value proposition is further divided into set 
of offerings, which are elementary products or services offered to the 
customer , and  outlin es the assumed value to t he customer. (Osterwalder, 
2004)  
 
The term ‘c apability ’ is used  to represent a company’s ability to execute a 
repeatable pattern of actions to provide the value proposition(s). The 
execution of activity requires one or more resources, which can be 
tangible , intangible or human resources. The resources can be also 
provided by outside actors, which are companies with whom the firm has 
partnership. (Osterwalder, 2004)  
 
This paper links the resource and activity concepts used in Osterwalder’s 
business model ont ology with the concepts of  SOA , allowing the IT to be 
conceptualized following the systems theory as proposed by Nevo and 
Wade  (2010) .  
 
Ontology of Services in Enterprises  
The basic ideology behind SOA is to package software resources as 
reusable and auto nomous services representing business -complete work, 
that can be used in business processes as flexible building blocks for 
business development (Papazoglou and Van Den Heuvel, 2007). In other 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 words , SOA provides a means of placing  information technology i nto 
packages  that are meaningful  from a business point of view.  
 
The main method for classifying the services in SOA has been through  
granularity of the services  (Huergo et al., 2014) . Granularity of service  
means the functional richness provided by the s ervice (Rosen et al., 20 08). 
The coarser the service is, the larger the functionality offered by the 
service. In other words, coarse -grained services provide more functionality 
within a single service operation than fine -grained services ( Rosen et al., 
2008).  
 
Several frameworks and layer -models have been proposed for categorizing 
services , based on their granularity (Erl, 2005; Steen et al., 2005). In 
addition SOA Reference Architecture (SOA RA) (The Open Group, 2011)  
provides a standard  for classif ying the services  into consume r, business 
process , services and implementation layer s.  
 
Categorization based on the granularity of the services does not take into 
consideration what the service does or provides for the enterprise, but 
rather classifies the serv ices based on their intended consume rs. In 
addition to  service granularity, services can also be categorized based on 
their intended usage in the enterprises . A literature survey (Cai  et al. , 
2010) , which focused on service identification and classificatio n methods , 
identified two methods that proposed business oriented service 
classifications. Both methods contain formal metamode ls for services 
(Dwivedi  and Kulkarni, 2008; Alahmari et al., 2010).  
 
Dwivedi  and Kulkarni (2008) proposed that the services sho uld be 
classified as process, business, composite, informational, data, utility, 
infrastructure, and partner services. Alahmari  et al. (2010) classified the 
services as process, composite, business, transactional -data, master -data, 
utility, and infrastruct ure services.  
 
From a business model point  of view , the granularity of the service is not a 
meaningful aspect. What matters in a business model is what the service 
does, not from how many layers it is built on. If we separate these two 
aspects as separate dimensions, we get a new classification of the services 
that better represent a business point of view.  
 
Based on the meta -model proposed by Dwivedi  and Kulkarni  (2008), one 
service can have several classifications  that are not related to the 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 granularity of the services . Such classifications are: process, 
informational, data, and infrastructure services.  Simila r business -oriented 
service classifications proposed by Alahmari  et al. (2010) are defined as 
process, transactional data, master data, and infrastr ucture services.  
 
Both sets of classifications separate data services from process services 
and also differentiate aggregated and atomic data services into separate 
classes. Alahmari et al. (2010) further separate s transactional and master 
data services  due to their different nature in business intelligence. Master 
data is typically created once and reused in many business transactions , 
and is thus more likely to be reused more often than transactional data , 
which  is shared only during the one specific  transaction (Knolmayer and 
Röthlin, 2006). From a business model point of view , this distinction is 
less meaningful because a combination of both transactional and master 
data are needed in business activities , but it may , nonetheless,  justify 
additional data governance to optimize the reuse of the shared business 
data (Baghi et al., 2014) .  
 
In general, d ata driven SOA is an approach used to decouple the data and 
the business logic, allowing systems to share the same data and data 
access logic  (Dan et al., 200 7). A data driven approach is also the core of 
Representational State Transfer (REST)  architecture style, which is widely 
used to develop web applications ( Fielding , 2000). REST encapsulates the 
business data as resources, which can be accessed and manipul ated 
through a generic interface ( Fielding , 2000).  
 
Both studies ( Dwivedi  and Kulkarni, 2008; Alahmari et al., 2010) 
identified process services as one of the classifications. Process driven 
SOA  is another SOA style in which the services encapsulate busin ess 
logic functionality to be used by other services or the logic for interacting 
with a user (Papazoglou  and Dubray, 2004) .  
 
Combining the meaningful classifications from a business model point of 
view provides the basis for business oriented classificat ion of the services, 
appended with the infrastructure services supporting them. The 
classification is provided in table  1 and visualized in the figure 3 . 
 
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Table 1 Service classification based on their intended usage in enterprises  
Service category  Definiti on and intended usage in the enterprises  
Elementary Data Service  Stores and provides access to the shared business data. Must be 
reused by all other services, which share the business data with 
each other.   
 
Intended usage is to enable shared access to th e business data and 
enable reuse of the data and thus reducing the work needed to 
gather the data.  
Data Access Service  Provides access to the shared business data through elementary 
data services. May enrich, merge or filter the business data  to 
create a view the business data suitable for the specific business 
activity . 
 
Intended usage is to extend the access to the shared business data 
beyond the users of the elementary services. Often used to 
provide a digital channel towards the customers and/or partne rs. 
Process Service  Automates business activity fully or partially.  
 
Intended usage is to relief the human resources from repetitive 
activities, which can be automated.  
Infrastructure Service  Other services enabling the development and operations of the  
other services without direct linkage to the business activities.  
 
Process 
ServiceData Service
Elementary
Data ServiceData 
Access ServiceBusiness model point of view
(What are the services used for)
Consumer
LayerTechnical point of view
(Granularity of the service)
Business
Process 
Layer
Services 
Layer
Master
DataTransactional
Data
Shared Business
Data
 
Figure 3 Ontology of services in enterprises  
Shared business data can be accessed through data access services in a 
distributed application environment (withi n company or between 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 companies) or  through elementary data service within one application or 
manually by h uman resource. See figure 4 for a visualization of the 
different type s of services and methods to access shared data.  
 
 
Figure 4 Different methods of sharing business data  
The example in figure 4 shows  the integration use case s (Alkkiomäki & 
Smolander, 2007)  representing the services in a distributed application 
environment . The example shows how the calendar data can be accesse d 
in different ways by different stakeholders. Technically the easiest way to 
access the data is through the data access services implementing the user 
interface inside the same application  as the services storing the data . 
Alternatively , data access servi ce can be implemented between the 
applications, allowing the data to be accessed through the user interface of 
another application, like the web shop application in the example. This 
secondary application can also be maintained by another company as the 
high volume customer in the example.  
 
An e nterprise service bus (ESB) is usually needed as part of IT 
infrastructure to provide technical interoperability and loose coupling 
between the applications (Papazoglou and Van Den Heuvel, 2007). Figure 
4 shows the d ifference between elementary and distributed data services: 
share d calendar data is an elementary data service storing the data itself, 
while the data access service on ESB is accessing the data indirectly.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Service -Oriented Business Model Ontology  
Servi ces that have been categorized from the business model point of view 
can be linked with the  Osterwalder’s business model ontology (2004) as 
follows:  
- Shared business data is one type of an intangible resource.  
- Elementary and data access services are support  activities, which 
can automate the access to and sharing of shared business data.  
- Data access service may be also one type of channel if used by the 
Customer.  
- Process service is a primary resource, which can automate 
information work activities.  
The propo sed extensions to the Osterwalder ’s business model ontology 
(2004) are shown in figure 5, where t he proposed extensions to the model  
are highlighted in red. 
 
Value Configuration CapabilityInfrastructure 
Management
Activity
Process 
ServiceData 
ServiceShared Business Data
-Quality attributessetOf
Tangible Intangible HumantypeOf
isAprovidedBy
Fits, flows or is shared bysetOf Actor
ResourceexecutedBy
Primary 
activitySupport
activitytypeOf
isA isA
Elementary
Data Service storedBytypeOf
Data Access 
ServicePartnership
Channel
typeOf
 
Figure 5 Extensions to Business Model Ontology  
Additionally , business data quality can be considered to be an attribute of 
the shared business data. Data quality has many dimensions . For  example , 
Pipino et al. (2002) ha ve identified sixteen  generic data quality dimensions 
ranging from completeness to understandability. The qu ality of the shared 
business data needs to be on an adequate level to be used as is by the 
process service. If the data quality is not sufficient, then the data needs to 
be fixed or inputted again manually. However, the data quality dimensions 
that are imp ortant in each activity differ and criteria for sufficient data 
quality are not in scope of this paper.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 The Service Value Framework  
The proposed merged ontology needs to be applied to be usable in 
enterprises. One way of applying the ontology in use is to  use it as a basis 
for a cost -volume -profit (CVP)  calculation to provide the break -even point 
for SOA investment.  
 
CVP analysis is a planning technique evolved from the theoretical model 
of the firm. CVP can be used to calculate the units needed to reach the 
break -even point (BEP) , where total revenues equal total costs, taking  into 
account both the fixed costs and variable costs. Conventional linear cost 
volume profit analysis is based on the assumption that both fixed and 
variable costs , as well as the revenues per unit , remain constant. With 
these assumptions , the BEP can be calculated with the formula : 
BEP=(Total Fixed costs)/(Sales price – Variable costs per unit). (Martin , 
2014 ) 
 
To calculate the BEP for a SOA investment, the formula can be applied by  
using a year as a unit of measurement, increased productivity in activities 
in place of sales price and the operational costs related to both data and IT 
maintenance as variable costs. Th e CVP formula is used as a basis for the 
Service Value F ramework pre sented in table  2 below.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Table 2 Service Value Framework  
Business Activities and 
Resources  Capital  
Investments  Volume  Operational  
Cost/Benefit  
<Changes to the value 
proposition >    <Financial benefit 
of each change to 
the value 
proposition>  
<Automat ed business 
activities>  <Process re -design 
+ SOA investment>  <number of 
activities per year>  <Financial benefit 
per activity>  
<Activities and 
channels access ing 
shared data resources>  <Process re -design 
+ SOA investment>  <number of 
activities per year>  <Financial benefit 
per activity>  
<Shared data 
resources>  <Investment to 
gather the data 
initially>  <Number of updates 
needed to keep the 
data quality 
adequate>  <Cost of one data 
update>  
Service development 
costs     
New process services  <cost of developin g 
the services>    
New data access 
services  <cost of developing 
the services>    
New elementary 
services  <cost of developing 
the services>    
Service runtime costs     
Operational costs of 
new services   <number of new 
services>  <Yearly operational 
cost>  
Totals  <Total capital 
investment>   <Total cost/benefit 
per year>  
Break -even point  <Total capital investment / (Total benefit  - Total cost per year) > 
 
Example Car Repair Shop  
To illustrate the usage of the Service Value Fra mework, an example BEP  
calculatio n is provided for a car repair shop that is planning to invest in 
SOA to change their business model.  
 
The car repair shop , used as an example,  provid es maintenance services , 
using  manual processes  before the change . The company was evaluating 
the feasibil ity of automating the repair time reser vation and quoting 
process , to save the resources of its customer center.  
 
Table 3  represents the business model canvas of the example car repair 
shop following the method described by Osterwalder and Pigneur  (2013 ). 
Changes provided by the evaluated investment are bolded.   
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Table 3 Example business model canvas of the car repair shop  
Key Partners  
- Spare part 
suppliers  
- New: SOA 
Partner  Key activities  
- Maintenance of 
cars 
- Spare part 
logistics  
- Time 
reservations a nd 
quoting  Value  
proposition  
- Low price and 
high quality car 
repairs  
 
- New: Time 
confirmation 
during the first 
call  Customer  
relationships  
- Retention of 
the regular 
customers with 
high quality  
 Customer  
segments  
- Car owners  
Key resources  
- Repai r men  
- Customer 
service  
- Warehouse staff  
 
- New: Calendar 
and stock level 
data  Channels  
- Telephone  
Cost structure  
- Customer service work (reduced)  
- Repair work  
- Spare parts  
- New: SOA runtime costs  Revenue streams  
- Time and material  
 
 
Figure 6 represents the service architecture needed to implement the 
change using the integration use case method for visualization 
(Alkkiomäki and Smolander, 2007).  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 
 
Figure 6 Service architecture matching the planned change to the busin ess model  
For the purpose of simplification, it can be assumed that the example car 
repair shop has a SOA partner providing cloud -based SOA infrastructure 
priced per service running on top of it , as well as a SOA development 
service priced with a fixed fee  per service.  
 
The n ext step is to merge the benefits of the business model and the cost 
of implementing the service  architecture using the Service Value 
Framework as shown in table 4  below.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Table 4 Cost -volume -profit calculation of the example car rep air shop  
Business Value,  
Activities  and Resources  Capital Investments  Volume  Operational  
Cost/Benefit  
- Time confirmation during  
 first call    Increased  
customer  
satisfaction  
- Time saved by automating 
the quoting  and reservation  Process redesign  
and training  
 -10 000€ 1 000 quotes / 
year 1000 x 40 min  
 x 100€/h =  
+66 667€  / year 
- Access to  repair man ’s 
calendar  
- Access to warehouse  stock 
level and price  
  1 000 accesses / 
year (benefits of  
automated  
access  
included in the  
above)  
- Maintenance of c alendar 
data 
- Maintenance of p art stock 
level and price  Initial warehouse 
inventory 50h x 
100€/h  =  
-5 000€  Avarage of 3 
data updates per 
quote, 2min 
each.  1000 x 6 min 
 x -100€/h = 
 -10 000€ /  year 
Service development costs     
One n ew process service  
Four new data access services  
Two new elementary services   7 new service s  
à 5 000€  = 
- 35 000€    
Service runtime costs     
Operational costs of new 
services   7 new services,  
à -1 000€ / year  -7 000€ /year  
Totals  -50 000€   + 49 667€/year  
Break -even point  1,0 years  
 
The calculation in table 4  shows that the direct benefits saved in working 
time pay back the investment in roughly one year. In addition to this, the 
customers get confirmation for the repairing time during the first call, 
changing the value proposition i tself and potentially increasing the 
customer satisfaction and enabling more net sales in the future.  
 
The case study  
The objective of this case study is to evaluate if the proposed ontology can 
be used in enterprises to link the changes in business model with related 
SOA investments to support decision -making.   
 
The requirements for the proposed ontology to be evaluated by the case 
study are:  
- The business stakeholders need to be able to understand the 
linkage between the business benefits and related IT in vestments.  
- The IT stakeholders need to be able to estimate the needed IT 
investments and understand the linkage to the business benefits . 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Exploratory case studies can be used to investigate situations in which the 
intervention being evaluated has n o clear  outcome (Baxter  & Jack , 2008).  
There is no single agreed set of methods for a case study; instead the 
methods must be selected from the viewpoint of the case and the research 
question (Luck  et al. , 2006).  
 
To evaluate the proposed framework, the presented  approach was used in 
an enterprise to define a business case for one business/IT development 
investment proposal using the business model canvas and the integration 
use case methodology in the same way as shown in the car repair shop 
example.  
 
The busine ss case material was drafted based on the preliminary 
information provided by the business stakeholders as an input and then 
reviewed with both IT and business representatives.  
 
The review session was audio recorded to gather and categorize the 
feedback fr om the stakeholders. Feedback is summarized in table 5 below.  
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Table 5 Feedback from different stakeholders  
Stakeholder  Feedback received  
Business stakeholder ,  
i.e. person(s) understanding the 
business model and its value 
proposition.  Business Model Ca nvas:  missing products in scope, 
contractual constraints and requirements from the 
manufacturing partner, end user usability, product 
market situation and potential synergies of reusing the 
same operating model with other kind of products.  
Service Architec ture:  differing actors and functional 
requirements when partner is involved, end user support 
model, terminology of the use cases, potential reuse of 
the IT solution, data maintenance needs, feasibility of 
data integrations between applications and product  
features.  
CVP:  process automation activities and their structure, 
training needs and promotion efforts needed to deploy 
the new partially automated process, activity 
terminology, data maintenance effort, application 
integration feasibility, new customer v alue and project 
governance issues.  
IT stakeholder ,  
i.e. person(s) understanding what is 
required to implement the services.  Business Model Canvas: end user usability.  
Service Architecture:  user support model, potential 
reuse of the IT solution, data mai ntenance needs, 
alignment between the IT solution and the business 
process . 
CVP: end user usability, process automation activities 
and their structure, project governance issues and 
availability of statistical data of current work effort of 
each activity p lanned to be automated.  
 
The business model canvas was not familiar to the business stakeholder, 
but it was possible to get feedback on it by briefing the approach of the 
canvas first. The canvas acted mainly as a tool to document the business 
model, with  only a little interaction between business and IT stakeholders.  
 
Draft service architecture provided a good basis for discussing the IT 
solution and how well it is aligned with the business processes, data 
maintenance needs and differentiated requirement s of different end user 
groups. Also the feasibility of the automated integrations between 
applications was discussed and agreed to be unnecessary in the ramp -up 
phase due to the low transaction volumes.  
 
The CVP calculation was pre -filled with the known b enefits. In this case, 
the main driver for the investment was the process rationalization  and it 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 was possible to estimate both the volumes and benefits per activity. The 
role of initial data gathering of the shared business data was limited as the 
majority  of the required data existed already and required only a little 
maintenance effort.  The need to train and promote the new way of 
working was understood, but it was not possible to estimate the cost or 
effort needed.  
 
As a general comment from the busines s stakeholder, it was suggested that 
the high -level process activity map could be used as material to brainstorm 
which of the activities could be streamlined with a new way of working. 
The level of detail was sufficient for the IT stakeholder to get a 
preliminary cost estimate from the IT supplier as a basis for the project 
budget.  Additionally, it was commonly agreed that this kind of material 
required an iterative approach to get all the necessary information gathered 
for the business case.  
 
Overall, the material enabled two -way communication between the 
business and IT stakeholders and served its purpose as a tool to gather the 
relevant costs and benefits for the business case.  
 
Discussion  
This paper provides one response to the challenge raised to inform ation 
science to provide conceptual and design -oriented research for 
understanding the essence of business models and their de sign 
(Osterwalder and Pigneur, 2013; Yoo, 2013).  
 
The proposed extension to the Osterwalder business model ontology 
applies the id ea of conceptualizing the IT with systems theory as proposed 
by Nevo and Wade (2010) . The model can be used to form IT -enabled 
resources consisting of both human resources and IT applications designed 
using the service -oriented architecture.  
 
The extension s are aligned with Osterwalder’s (2004) recommendation to 
align the IT applications with the company’s business model and trea t the 
IT infrastructure as a cost element. Likewise , it is aligned with the Val IT 
to include the full scope of development activi ties, covering both the IT 
and non -IT activities to achieve business value for the investments ( IT 
Governance Institute , 2008).  
 
Although a final consensus on defining the concept of the business  model  
has not yet been reached (Klang  et al. , 2014) , a wide  understanding of the 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 basic concepts related both to the business and IT are required to 
understand how IT delivers value within an enterprise.  Ontology has been 
proposed to be used as a link between SOA and its business value but with 
limited success (vom Brocke et al, 2009;  Thomas and vom Brocke, 2009).  
Instead of the technical granularity  viewpoint, this paper uses the business 
viewpoint as a basis for the ontology . 
 
The presented framework is fundamentally based on the resource -based 
view of the firm an d is thus limited to the value delivery process. The 
example shows how to calculate the tangible benefits of value delivery 
process, but does not  take into account the changes in the value 
proposition and value creation process of the business model. These 
benefits can be counted with the framework , but it does not define how  to 
calculate them . 
 
The integration use case method and service value framework can be used 
to facilitate the IT/business communication, at all levels, including top 
management. Improv ing the IT/business communication has been  found to 
be one of the key enablers for successful SOA adoption , and a ny practical 
tools for improv ing this communication are badly needed  (Baskerville et 
al., 2010; Joachim et al., 2013; Van den Bergh and Viaene,  2012; Boh and 
Yellin, 2010).  
 
In general, u se cases are lacking a direct linkage with the business 
processes , and may be difficult to interpret  without supporting narratives 
(Al-Fedaghi, 2014) . In addition to the use cases, business processes could 
be ut ilized with a service -oriented approach to support the service 
identification , as suggested by the business stakeholder of the case study 
as well as by Baghadi (2014).  
 
One advantage of SOA is the capability to model how the required 
business functionality  is divided between the applications using composite 
services, as demonstrated in the Figure 6. Another advantage of SOA is 
the possibility to encapsulate the service implementation behind a service 
interface enabling mixed use of different architectural s tyles. Like most 
top-down approache s (Huergo et al., 2014), the selected service 
identification method focuses on the identification of the services, leaving 
any implementation concerns to be evaluated separately with other 
complementary methods. A simplif ied method was chosen as the purpose 
of the paper is to link the services on a conceptual level and concretize it, 
not to make the detailed service design.  
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
  
The use of CVP to calculate the BEP for SOA development was proposed 
earlier by Kryvinska et al. (2 011), but their model focused  only on the 
long term benefits of development time and the reuse of services , 
compared to traditional IT development without reuse.  Likhvarev and 
Babkin (2012) proposed a more sophisticated method to evaluate 
implementation op tions taking into account interest rate and risks 
separately on  the service level, but without guidance as to how to identify 
the benefits of using the services. However, these kinds of methods can be 
used to complement the simplistic CVP calculations used  in this paper.  
 
In general, r eusability has been the holy grail of the software industry for 
decades and t he original idea of reuse was to use the same software sour ce 
code through class libraries, which can be applied to SOA as well (Krafzig 
et al., 2005 ). This type of code reuse of services has a direct impact on the 
design, development, testing , and maintenance efforts of the services (Erl, 
2005).   
 
From a business model point of view, code reuse reduces the SOA 
development and maintenance costs in the long term, but from a single 
investment point of view, this long -term improvement is minor. Easy 
communication may be one reason why enterprises and especially IT 
departments are promoting the cost cutting potential of SOA instead of the 
positive contribut ions to business agility (Schelp and Aier, 2009).  
 
Shared access to data provides enterprises with a new intangible resource, 
which can be cloned almost infinitely. Infinite resources will b e needed if 
the enterprises con tinue to search for sustainable gro wth despite the 
environmental limitations they are currently facing with tangible resources 
(Kotler, 2011).  
 
The case study covers only one investment case and more empirical data is 
required to understand if it is applicable  to other kind s of cases. Howe ver, 
no fundamental issues were identified either in the approach to making the 
CVP calculations or in the conceptual linkage between the business model 
and the related service architecture  and thus t his contribution should be 
valuable both for researchers  and also for practitioners.    
 
Conclusion  
In this paper we have applied common practices from strategic 
management (business modeling), managerial economics (cost -volume -
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 profit analysis) and in formation science (service -oriented architecture) to 
investig ate and search for conceptual linkage between information 
technology and business value. This concretizes the com plexity of the 
concept of IT value and the propos ed model just scratches the sur face.   
 
This paper contributes a unique two-dimensional ontolog y of services in 
enterprises, which is further merged with the existing business model 
ontology to provide a n end-to-end service -oriented business model 
ontology. The merged ontology is evaluated with the help of two simple 
methods enabling conceptual link age to be tested in practice.  
 
Both the c ost-volume -profit calculation  framework and the integration use 
case method are simplistic , but can be replaced with more comprehensive 
solutions . However, both have served their purpose as a proof of concept 
for an end-to-end linkage between the business benefits  of different kinds 
of services.  
 
References  
 
Al-Fedaghi, S. (2014) ‘Information system requirements: a flow –based 
diagram versus supplementation of use case narratives with activity 
diagrams ’, International  Journal of Business Information Systems , Vol. 
17, No. 3, pp.306 -322. 
 
Alahmari, S., Zaluska, E. and De Roure, D. (2010), ‘A service 
identification framework for legacy system migration into SOA’ in 
Services Computing 2010 , IEEE International, pp.614 -617. 
 
Alkkiomäki, V.  and Smolander, K. (2007) , ‘Integration Use Cases –An 
Applied UML Technique for Modeling Functional Requirements in 
Service Oriented Architecture ’ in Requirements Engineering: Foundation 
for Software Quality , Springer Berlin Heidelberg.  pp. 190-202. 
 
Baden -Fuller, C.  and Haefliger, S. (2013) ‘Business models and 
technological innovation ’, Long Range Planning , Vol.46, No.6, pp.419 -
426. 
 
Baghdadi, Y. (2014) ‘Modelling business process with services: towards 
agile enterprises ’, International Jour nal of Business Information Systems , 
Vol. 15, No.4, pp.410 -433. 
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Baghi, E., Schlosser, S., Ebner, V., Otto, B. and Österle, H. (2014) 
‘Toward a Decision Model for Master Data Application Architecture’ in  
47th Hawaii International Conference on  Systems Sci ences , Waikoloa , 
IEEE ,  pp. 3827 -3836 . 
 
Baskerville, R., Cavallari, M., Hjort -Madsen, K., Pries -Heje, J., 
Sorrentino, M. and Virili, F. (2010) ‘The strategic value of SOA: a 
comparative c ase study in the banking sector ’, International Journal of 
Informatio n Technology and Management,  Vol.9, No.1 , pp.30-53. 
 
Baxter , P. and  Jack, S. (2008) ‘ Qualitative case study methodology: Study 
design and implementation for novice researchers ’, The Qualitative 
Report , Vol.13, No.4 , pp.544-559. 
 
Boh, W. and Yellin, D. (201 0) ‘Enablers and benefits of implementing 
Service -Oriented Architecture: an empirical investigation ’, International 
Journal of Information Technology and Management , Vol.9, No.1, pp.3-
29. 
 
Cai, S., Liu, Y., Wang, X. (2011) ‘A survey of service identificati on 
strategies’ In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE Asia -Pacific services  
computing conference (APSCC 2011) , IEEE Computer Society,  
Piscataway, pp.464 –470. 
 
Dan, A., Johnson, R. and Arsanjani, A. (2007) ‘ Information as a service: 
Modeling and realization ’ In Systems Development in SOA Environments, 
2007. SDSOA'07: ICSE Workshops 2007 . IEEE.  
 
Dwivedi, V. and Kulkarni, N. (2008) ‘A model driven service 
identification approach for process centric systems’ In Congress on 
Services Part II, 2008.,  IEEE , pp.65 -72. 
 
Erl, T. (2005)  Service -Oriented Architecture (SOA): Concepts, 
Technology, and Design , New Jersey,  Pearson Education Inc  
 
Fielding, R. (2000)  Architectural styles and the design of network -based 
software architectures . Doctoral dissertation, University of Cali fornia, 
Irvine.  
 
Frey, C. and Osborne , M. (2013 ) The Future of Employment: How 
Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?  [online] 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 http://www.futuretech.ox.ac.uk/sites/futuretech.ox.ac.uk/files/The_Future_
of_Employment_OMS_Working_Paper_1.pdf  (Accessed 26 June 2014)  
 
Gómez -Pérez, A.  and Manzano -Macho, D. (2004)  ‘An overview of 
methods and tools for ontology learning from texts ’, The knowledge 
engineering review , Vol. 19, No.3, pp.187 -212. 
 
Hevner A., March, S., Park, J. and Ram, S. (2004) ‘Design science in 
information systems research’, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 28, No.1, pp.75 -105. 
 
Huergo,  R., Pires,  P., Delicato,  F., Costa,  B., Cavalca nte, E. and  Batista , T. 
(2014) ' A systematic survey of service identification methods ’ Service 
Oriented Computing and Applications , Vol. 8, No.3, pp.199-219. 
 
IT Governance Institute (2008)  Enterprise Value: Governance of IT 
Investment s, Getting Started Wit h Value Management [online] . IT 
Governance Institute,  http://www.isaca.org/Knowledge -
Center/Research/ResearchDeliverables/Pages/Enterprise -Value -
Governance -of-IT-Investments -Getting -Started -with-Value -
Management.aspx  (Accessed 7 October 2014)  
 
Jeansson, J.  (2014)  ‘Information systems valuescape ’, International 
Journal of Business Information Systems , Vol. 17, No.1, pp.49 -66. 
 
Joachim, N., Beimborn, D. and Weitzel, T. (2013)  ‘The influence of SOA 
governance mechanisms on IT flexibility and service reuse ’, The Journal 
of Strategic Information Systems , Vol.22, No.1, pp.86-101. 
 
Klang, D., Wallnöfer, M. and Hacklin, F. (2014) ‘The Business Model 
Paradox: A Systematic Review and Exploration of Antecedent’, 
International Journal of Management Reviews , Vol. 16, No.  4, pp.454 -
478. 
 
Knolmayer, G. and Röthlin, M. (2006) ‘Quality of material master data 
and its effect on the usefulness of distributed ERP systems ’ in 
International conference on Advances in Conceptual Modeling: theory and 
practice (CoMoGIS'06) , Springer -Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 362-371.  
 
Kohli, R . and Grover, V . (2008)  ‘Business Value of IT: An Essay on 
Expanding Research Directions to Keep up with the Times ’, Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems , Vol.9, No.1, pp. 23 -39. 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
  
Kokko, T., A ntikainen, J. and Systä, T. (2009)  ‘Adopting SOA - 
Experiences from Nine Finnish Organizations ’, In Proceedings of the 
2009 European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering 
(CSMR '09) , Washington,  IEEE Computer Society , pp.129 -138. 
 
Kotler, P.  (2011) ‘ Reinventing marketing to manage the environmental 
imperative ’, Journal of Marketing , Vol.75, No.4, pp.132 -135. 
 
Krafzig, D., Banke, K. and Slama, D. (2005)  Enterprise SOA: service -
oriented architecture best practices , Prentice Hall PTR  
 
Kryvinska,  N., Auer, L. and  Strauss, C. (2011)  ‘An approach to extract the 
business value from SOA services ’, In Exploring Services Science , 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 42-52. 
 
Likhvarev, A.  and Babkin, E. (2012)  ‘Developing the method for value 
assessment of SOA -based IS projects ’, In Perspectives in Business 
Informatics Research , BIR 2012 , Nizhny Novgorod, Russia , Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg , pp.172 -186. 
 
Lindgreen , A. and Wynstra,  F. (2005)  ‘Value in business markets: What 
do we know? Where are we going? ’, Indus trial Marketing Management , 
Vol. 34, No.7, pp.732-748. 
 
Lindgreen, A., Hingley, M., Grant, D., Morgan, R. (2012) ‘ Value in 
business and industrial marketing: Past, present, and future ’, Industrial 
Marketing Management , Vol . 41, No.1, pp.207-214. 
 
Luck , L., Jackson , D. and  Usher , K. (2006) ‘Case study: a bridge across 
the paradigms ’, Nursing inquiry , Vol.13, No.2, pp.103-109. 
 
Marthandan, G.  and Meng, T. (2010) ‘Thirst for Business Value of 
Information Technology ’, International Journal of Technology Diffusi on, 
Vol. 1, No.1, pp.28-40. 
 
Marthandan, G.  and Tang, C. (2012) ‘Mining The Literature In Search Of 
IT Business Value ’, Review of Business Information Systems , Vol. 16, No. 
3, pp.89 -102. 
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Martin, J. (2014) Management Accounting: Concepts, Techniques & 
Cont roversial Issues, Chapter 11: Conventional Lin ear Cost -Volume -
Profit Analysis [online] http://maaw.info/Chapter11.htm  (Accessed 24 
March 2014 ) 
 
Melville, N., Kraemer, K. a nd Gurbaxani, V. (2004)  ‘Review: Info rmation 
technology and organizational performance: An integrative model of IT 
business value ’, In MIS Quarterly , Vol.28, No.2, pp.283-322. 
 
Nevo, S. and  Wade, M. (2010)  ‘The Formation and Value of IT -Enabled 
Resources: Antecedents and Consequences of Syner gistic Relationships ’ 
In MIS Quarterly , Vol.34, No.1, pp.163 -183. 
 
Osterwalder, A. (2004)  The business model ontology: A proposition in a 
design science approach , Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales HEC, 
173, University of Lausanne.   
 
Osterwalder, A. and Pigneur, Y. (2012)  Business Model Generation , 
Hoboken, John Wiley.  
 
Osterwalder, A. and Pigneur, Y. (2013)  ‘Designing Business Models and 
Similar Strategic Objects: The Contribution of IS ’ In Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems , Vol.14 , No.5 , pp.237 -244. 
 
Papazoglou, M. and Dubray, J. (2004) A survey of web service 
technologies . [online] Technical Report #DIT -04-058, Department of 
Information and Communication Technology, University of Trento. 
http://eprints.biblio.unitn.it/archive/00000586/  (Accessed 9 September 
2014)  
 
Papazoglou, M. and Van Den Heuvel,  W-J. (2007)  ‘Service oriented 
architectures: approaches, t echnologies and research issues’ in  The VLDB 
journal , Vol.16, No.3, pp.389-415. 
 
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M. and Chatterjee, S. (2007)  ‘A 
design science re -search methodology f or information systems research’ 
In Journal of management information systems , Vol.24, No.3 , pp.45 -77. 
 
Pipino, L., Lee, Y.  and Wang , R. (2002)  ‘Data quality assessment’, 
Communications of the ACM , Vol. 45, No.4, pp.211-218. 
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    The Role of Service -Oriented Architecture as a Part of the Business Model     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Rosen, M ., Lublinsky, B., Smith, K. and  Balcer, M. (20 08) Applied SOA: 
service -oriented architecture and design strategies , Wiley  
 
Schelp, J. and Aier, S. (2009)  ‘SOA and EA – sustainable contributions 
for increasing corporate agility ’ In Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS) , Waikoloa , pp.1 -8. 
 
Schryen, G. (2010) ‘ Preserving knowledge on IS business value ’ In 
Business &  Information Systems Engineering , Vol.2, No.4, pp.233-244. 
 
Schryen, G. (2013)  ‘Revisiting IS business value research: what we 
already know, what we still need to  know, and how we can get there’ In 
European Journal of Information Systems , Vol.22, No.2, pp.139-169. 
 
Steen, M., Strating, P., Lankhorst, M. , ter Doest, H.  and Iacob, M. (2005) 
‘Service -oriented enterprise architecture ’ In Stojanovic, Z. and 
Dahanayake , A. (Eds.) , Service -Oriented Software System Engineering: 
Challenges and Practices , Hershey,  Idea Group Publishing, pp.132 -154. 
 
Teece, D. (2010) ‘Business models, bu siness strategy and innovation’ In 
Long range planning , Vol.43, No.2, pp.172 -194. 
 
The Open Group (2011)  SOA Reference Architecture . [online] , The Open 
Group.  https://collaboration.opengroup.org/projects/soa -ref-
arch/protected/index.php  (Accessed 3 March 2014)  
 
Thomas, O. and vom Brocke, J. (2009) ‘A value -driven approach to the 
design of serv ice-oriented information systems -making use of conceptual 
models’, Information Systems and e -Business Management , Vol.8 , No.1, 
pp.67 -97. 
 
Uschold, M. and King, M. (1995) ‘Towards a Methodology for Building 
Ontologies’ in Workshop on Basic Ontological Issue s in Knowledge 
Sharing , Montreal  
 
Van den Bergh, J.  and Viaene, S. (2012)  ‘Promises from SOA: 
Reengineering a procurement process at Belgacom Mobile -a case study 
approach ’ In Business Process Management Journal , Vol.18, No.5, 
pp.815 -828. 
 
   
    
   
    
   
    
    Ville Alkkiomäki     
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 vom Brocke, J., B raccini, A. , Sonnenberg, C. and Ender, E. (2009) ‘A 
process oriented assessment of the IT infrastructure value: a proposal of an 
ontology based approach’ In Abramowicz , W. (Eds) Business Information 
Systems, Vol 21, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.13 -24. 
 
Yoo, Y. (2013)  ‘The Tables Have Turned: How Can the Information 
Systems Field Contribute to Technology and Innovation Management 
Research? ’ In Journal of the Association for Information Systems , Vol.14 , 
No.5 , pp.227-236. 
 
Zott, C., Amit, R. and Massa, L. (2 011) ‘ The business model: recent 
developments and future research ’ In Journal of management , Vol.37, 
No.4, pp.1019 -1042 . 
 
 
 
View publication statsView publication stats
