 
 
 
 
 
The Four Steps to  
the Epiphany 
 
  
  
 
 
 
         
The Four Steps to  
the Epiphany 
  
Successful Strategies for  
Products that Win 
 
 
 
Steven G. Blank 
 
  
  
Second Edition 
 
  
                         
 
        
 
 
 
Third Edition Copyright © 2006 Steven G. Blank 
 
All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in any form what soever without permission, 
except in case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.    
Published 2006 
Printed by Lulu.com   Third revised printing 
 
Acknowledgments | i Acknowledgments 
 
In my 25 years as a technology entrepreneur I was lucky to have three extraordinary mentors, each 
brilliant in his own field: Ben Wegbreit who taught  me how to think, Gordon Bell who taught me 
what to think about, and Allen Michels who showed me how to turn thinking into direct and 
immediate action. 
I was also extremely fortunate to be working in Si licon Valley when three of its most influential 
marketing practitioners and strategists were active.  As a VP of Marketing I was strongly influenced 
by the customer-centric books of Bill Davidow, former VP of Marketing of Intel and founder of Mohr, 
Davidow Ventures and consider myself fortunate to have had him on my board at MIPS Computers.  
Regis McKenna was already a PR and marketing legend  with his own firm when I started my career, 
but his thinking and practice still resonates in my work.  Finally, I still remember the hair rising on 
the back of my neck when I first read Geoff Moore an d the notion of a “chasm.” It was the first time I 
realized that there were repeatable patterns of bu siness behavior that coul d explain the heretofore 
unexplainable. 
At U.C. Berkeley Haas Business School, Jerry Engel, director of the Lester Center on 
Entrepreneurship, was courageous enough to give  me a forum to test and teach the Customer 
Development Methodology to hundr eds of unsuspecting students. Professor John Freeman at Haas 
has offered valuable insight on the different sales cycles by Market Type.  Finally my long-suffering 
teaching partner at Haas, Rob Majteles, ensured that not only did my students get my enthusiasm, 
but also got a coherent syllabus and their papers gr aded and back on time.  At Stanford, Tom Byers, 
Mark Leslie, Audrey Maclean and Mike Lyons were gr acious enough to invite me to teach with them 
in the Graduate School of Engineering and hone my methodology as they offered additional insights 
on new product selling cycles.   Finally, Columbia Business School allowed me to inflict the course 
and this text on their students in their jo int MBA program with the Haas Business school. 
In the venture capital world in addition to funding some of my startups, John Feiber at MDV 
and Katherine Gould at Foundation Capital have acted as stalwart sounding boards and supporters.  
My friends Steve Weinstein, Bob Dorf, Bernar d Fraenkel, Todd Basche and Jim Wickett have 
made innumerable and valuable comments and suggestions.   
Will Harvey and Eric Ries of IMVU were the first corporate guinea pigs to implement some or all 
of the Customer Development Methodology.  This book was required reading for every new hire at 
their company.  Fred Durham at CafePress allowed me to sit on his board and watch a world-class 
entrepreneur at work.   
Besides running engineering at IMVU Eric Ries  also moonlighted as copyeditor and helped 
eliminate the embarrassing typos of the first revision.  
This book would be much poorer without all of their contributions. 
Finally, my wife Alison Elliott not only put up with my obsession with finding a methodology for 
early stage Customer Development, and my passion for teaching it, she added her wise counsel, 
insight and clarity to my thinking.  This book would not have happened without her. 
 
 
 Table of Contents 
 
 A
CKNOWLEDGMENTS  I 
THE HERO’S JOURNEY  iii 
WINNERS AND LOSERS  V 
CHAPTER 1   THE PATH TO DISASTER :  THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT MODEL   1 
CHAPTER 2  THE PATH TO EPIPHANY :  THE CUSTOMER DEVELOPMENT MODEL  15 
CHAPTER 3   CUSTOMER DISCOVERY  27 
CHAPTER 4   CUSTOMER VALIDATION  67 
CHAPTER 5   CUSTOMER CREATION  101 
CHAPTER 6   COMPANY BUILDING   133 
BIBLIOGRAPHY  171 
APPENDIX A   CUSTOMER DEVELOPMENT TEAM 175 
APPENDIX B   CUSTOMER DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST  181 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  231 
 
 
 
The Hero’s Journey   | iiiPreface 
The Hero’s Journey 
A legendary hero is usually the founder of some thing—the founder of a new age, the founder  
of a new religion, the founder of a new city, the founde r of a new way of life. In order to found something 
new, one has to leave the old and go on a quest of the seed idea, a germinal idea  
that will have the potential of br inging forth that new thing. 
— Joseph Campbell,  Hero with a Thousand Faces 
 
Joseph Campbell popularized the notion of an archet ypal journey that recurs in the mythologies and 
religions of cultures around the world. From Moses and the burning bush to Luke Skywalker 
meeting Obi wan Kenobi, the journey always begins with a hero who hears a calling to a quest. At 
the outset of the voyage, the path is unclear, and th e end is not in sight. Each hero meets a unique 
set of obstacles, yet Campbell’s keen insight was that the outline of these stories was always the 
same. There were not a thousand different heroes, but one hero with a thousand faces.   
The hero’s journey is an apt way to think of st artups.  All new companies and new products begin 
with an almost mythological vision–a hope of what could be, with a goal that few others can see.  It’s 
this bright and burning vision that differentia tes the entrepreneur from big company CEOs and 
startups from existing businesses. Founding entrepreneurs are out to prove that their vision and 
business are real and not some hallucination; to  succeed they must abandon the status quo and 
strike out on what appears to be a new path, often shrouded in uncertainty.  Obstacles, hardships 
and disaster lie ahead, and their jo urney to success tests mo re than financial reso urces. It tests their 
stamina, agility, and th e limits of courage. 
Most entrepreneurs feel their journey is unique. Yet what Campbell perceived about the 
mythological hero’s journey is true of startups as well: however dissimila r the stories may be in 
detail, their outline is always the same .  Most entrepreneurs travel down the startup path without a 
roadmap and believe that no model or template coul d apply to their new venture. They are wrong.  
For the path of a startup is well worn, and well understood. The secret is that no one has written it 
down.  
Those of us who are serial entrepreneurs have followed our own hero’s journey and taken 
employees and investors with us.  Along the way we’ve done things our own way; taking good advice, 
bad advice, and no advice. On about the fifth or sixth startup, at least some of us began to recognize 
that there was an emerging pattern between our su ccesses and failures. Namely, that there is a true 
and repeatable path to success, a path that elim inates or mitigates the most egregious risks and 
allows the company to grow into a large, successful enterprise.  One of us decided to chart this path 
in the following pages. 
 
Discovering the Path 
”Customer Development” was born during my time spent consulting for the two venture capital firms 
who between them put $12 million into my last failed  startup. (My mother kept asking if they were 
going to make me pay the money back. When I told her they not only didn’t want it back, but were 
trying to see if they could give me more for my next company, she paused for a long while and then 
said in a very Russian accent, “Only in America are the streets paved with gold.”) Both venture firms 
sought my advice for their portfoli o companies. Surprisingly, I enjoyed seeing other startups from an 
outsider’s perspective. To everyone’s delight, I co uld quickly see what needed to be fixed. At about 
 
 
iv | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   the same time, two newer companies asked me to jo in their boards.  Between the board work and the 
consulting, I enjoyed my first-ever corporate “out-of-body experience.”  
No longer personally involved, I became a dispassionate observer. From this new vantage point I 
began to detect something deeper than I had seen before: there seemed to be a pattern in the midst 
of the chaos. Arguments that I had heard at my ow n startups seem to be repeated at others. The 
same issues arose time and again: big company managers versus entrepreneurs, founders versus 
professional managers, engineering versus marketing, marketing versus sales, missed schedule 
issues, sales missing the plan, running out of money, raising new money. I began to gain an 
appreciation of how world-class venture capitalists  develop pattern recogn ition for these common 
types of problems. “Oh yes, company X, they’re having  problem 343. Here are th e six likely ways that 
it will resolve, with these probabilities.” No one was actually quite that good, but some VCs had 
“golden guts” for these kinds of operating issues. 
Yet something in the back of my mind bothered me. If great venture capitalists could recognize 
and sometimes predict the types of problems that we re occurring, didn’t that mean that the problems 
were structural rather than endemic? Wasn’t something fundamentally wrong with the way 
everyone organizes and manages st artups? Wasn’t it possible that the problems in every startup 
were somehow self-inflicted and could be ameliorated with a different structure? Yet when I talked 
to my venture capital friends, they said, “Well, that’s just how startups work. We’ve managed 
startups like this forever; there is  no other way to manage them.”   
After my eighth and likely final startup, E.piphany, it became clear that there is a better a way 
to manage startups. Joseph Campbell’s insight of  the repeatable patterns in mythology is equally 
applicable to building a successful startup. All st artups (whether a new division inside a larger 
corporation or in the canonical garage) follow similar patterns—a series of steps which, when 
followed, can eliminate a lot of the early wandering in the dark. Looking back on startups that have 
thrived reflect this pattern again and again and again.  
So what is it that makes some startups successful and leaves othe rs selling off their furniture? 
Simply this: startups that survive the first few tough years do not follow the traditional product-
centric launch model espoused by product managers or the venture capital community. Through trial 
and error, hiring and firing, successful startups all invent a parallel process to product development. 
In particular, the winners invent and live by a proce ss of  customer learning and discovery. I call this 
process “Customer Development,” a sibling to “Pro duct Development,” and each and every startup 
that succeeds recapitulates it, knowingly or not.  
This book describes the “Customer Development” model in detail. The model is a paradox 
because it is followed by successful startups, yet arti culated by no one.  Its basic propositions are the 
antithesis of common wisdom yet they are followed by those who succeed.   
It is the path that is hidden in plain sight. 
 
 
Winners and Losers  |  v  Introduction 
Winners and Losers 
What if everything you think you know about taking products to market is wrong?  What would you 
do differently if you realized that  only 1 out of 10 new product introductions result in a profitable 
business?  Would you continue to  operate the same way, week after week, year after year?  The 
surprising fact is that companie s large and small, established corp orate giants as well as brand new 
startups, fail in 9 out of 10 attempts to launch th eir new products.  They unnecessarily burn through 
billions of dollars as they try to force their new prod ucts into markets where no one is waiting to buy.  
Yet time and again they all return to th e same processes that produce failure. 
The phenomenon occurs over and over again in every product category, whether high tech, low 
tech, consumer products, or business-to-business pr oducts.  Some new product disasters have become 
the stuff of legend:   
• Volkswagen Phaeton.  Volkswagen took all of Toyota’s lessons in launching it’s high-end 
Lexus brand and ignored them.  Cost to date: $500 million 
• Kodak’s Photo CD.  Kodak offered film camera customers the ability to put their pictures on 
a compact disc and view them on their TV’s.  It was 10 years ahead of its time and marketed 
to customers who were not ready for it. Viable  early adopter market in corporate marketing 
departments ignored.  Cost: $150 Million 
• Segway. Thought their market was everyone in  the world who walked and confused world 
class public relations with customers with checkbooks.  Still searching for their real markets.  
Cost to date:  $200 million.  
• Apple’s Newton.  They were right about the Personal Digital Assistant market but five years 
too soon.  Yet they spent like they were in an existing market.  Cost: $100 Million 
• Jaguar X-Type.  Created a Ford-type, low-end product and slapped the Jag name on it, 
alienating their high-end customers.  Cost: $200 million 
• Webvan. Groceries on demand: the killer app of the internet.  The company spent money like 
a drunken sailor.  Even in the Internet Bubble costs and infrastructure grew faster than the customer base.  Loss:  $800 million. 
• Sony’s MiniDisc players.  A sm aller version of the CD wildly popular in Japan. The US isn’t 
Japan.  Cost to date:  $500 mil lion after 10 years of marketing. 
• R.J. Reynolds’ Premier and Eclipse smokeless cigarettes.  Understood what the general 
public (nonsmokers) wanted, but did not understand that their customers didn’t care.  Cost:  $450 million 
• Motorola’s Iridium satellite-based phone system.  Engineering triumph and built to support 
a customer base of millions.  No one asked the customer if they wanted it.  Cost $5 billion.  
Yes, billion. Satellites are awfully expensive.   
 
I could go on and on.  And you probably have your  own favorites you could add to the list.  What 
if I told you that such disasters can be avoided?  What if I told you that there are new product 
introduction methods available that dramatically in crease the odds of a new product finding a home  
--  and at a minimum that guarantee that there will  be a ready, willing, and paying customer base 
just waiting to get their hands on that new, new th ing being lovingly grown in the R& D greenhouse?  
The methods I’m advocating in this book -- are easily explained and understood, but they run 
counter to the way most companies operate.  There aren’t many managers around who are willing to 
reject the conventional wisdom that guides most firms in their quest to take new products to market. 
Those managers and entrepreneurs who do follow this different path find that there are eager 
customers for their products. 
To name a few who did it right in their recent, very successful product launches:  
 
 
 
vi | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   • Proctor & Gamble’s Swiffer. A swiveling, disposable mop-on-a-stick.  Sophisticated planning 
and consumer research have resulted in a $2. 1 billion market in 2003 that could double by 
2008.   
• Toyota’s Prius.  They’ve found a profitable niche for their electric hybrid car.  As a classic 
disruptive innovation, sales will grow and Toyota will continue to eat the existing US car 
companies for lunch. In its first five years sales grew to $5 b illion.  By 2015 hybrids could 
make up 35% of U.S. car market.  
• General Mills’ Yoplait GoGurt.  Yogurt in a tube.  The goal was to keep their yogurt 
consumer base of toddlers and li ttle kids for as long as possibl e.  Research led to the tube 
packaging, making yogurt easier to consume on the go.  
 
The Difference between the Winners and Losers 
Every company has some methodology for product de velopment, launch and li fe-cycle management.  
These processes provide detailed plans, checkpoints and goals for every step in getting a product out 
the door; sizing markets, estimating sales, developing marketing requirements documents, 
prioritizing product features.  Yet at the end of the day even with all these procedures the 
embarrassing fact is that 9 out of 10 of new products are failures.   
The difference between the winners and losers is simple.   Products developed with senior 
management out in front of customers early and often - win.  Products handed off to a sales and 
marketing organization that has only been tangentially involved in the new product development 
process lose.  It’s that simple.  
The reality for most companies today is that ex isting product introduction methodologies are 
focused on activities that go on inside a company own building. While customer input may be a 
checkpoint or “gate” in the process it doesn’t drive it.   
This book is not another set of product development processes that are simple extensions of what 
already exists.  New product mortality rates tell us that doesn’t work; the emperor simply has no 
clothes.  Existing new product launch processes don’t offer prediction and guidance of customer 
behavior, therefore we need to build a new set of product development processes that will.  
What this book offers is a radi cal reexamination of the entire new product introduction process.  
It makes clear that companies need a parallel proc ess to product development; one dedicated to 
bringing customers and their needs head first into the new product introduction process – before the 
product is ever launched or shipped. 
The lesson is clear:  by listening to potential future customers’, by going out into the field and 
investigating potential cu stomers needs and markets before  being inexorably committed to a specific 
path and precise product specs – the difference between the winners and losers – and that’s the 
Customer Development Process described in this book. 
 
 
Who Is This Book For? 
When I first started writing this book, I thought its audience would be small and its applicability 
would be narrow. I first believed that my readers would be startup entrepreneurs.  
With this audience in mind, I went out to talk to venture capital firms and their portfolio 
company startups to test the Customer Development concepts. Many of these startups were past the 
“we’re just starting out” stage. At first, I thought the Customer Development model might be 
interesting reading for them, but not particularly germane to CEOs and other executives who were 
in the midst of building a company. This group h ad real day-to-day operatio nal problems to solve, 
and the last thing on their minds was to read some abstruse text about what they should have done 
last year. But the more I talked to these startups and spent time understanding their issues, the 
more I realized that they were all under pressure to solve a common set of problems: Where is our 
market? Who are our customers? How do we build the right team? How do we scale sales? These 
issues are at the heart of the Customer Development methodology.  
 
Winners and Losers   | viiNot surprisingly, there is a large body of literature on the success and failure of new products in 
large companies. The more I read and then talked to large corporations, the more I became convinced 
that the Customer Development model is even more applicable to existing companies attempting to 
launch new products into new markets. The chal lenge of understanding customers and finding a 
market is the same for a large company as for a st artup. But large companies have established well-
defined processes and procedures that are the antithesis of the Customer Development model. In 
other words, the guidelines for starting a new product in a new market are the antithesis of the well-
honed rules observed by large and successful enterprises. Indeed, those rules are a recipe for failure 
when it comes to a startup-like initiative. The cost of launching new products into new markets can 
exceed the absolute dollars a startup spends by several orders of magnitude. While the expected 
returns are huge, making these type of mistakes in a large company can be catastrophic.  
Finally, I had found my audience for this book: any team launching a new product, from a small 
entrepreneurial startup to a large corporation. This book is not just for the CEO but all executives 
and employees of early stage ventures; it’s for all the founders, the engineers, the VP of Sales, the VP 
of Marketing, etc. – anyone who is struggling to come up with answers on how to find customers and 
markets.  This book will help all of you to bring rigor to the Customer Development Process. 
Throughout this book, I use the terms entrepreneur  and startup quite liberally. The terms 
encompass the brave souls in Fortune 1000 companie s just as much as they describe three teens 
starting in a garage.  
This or any road map will only take you where you want to go if you have the discipline to follow 
it, together with the vision and passion that characterize the best entrepreneurs. As with great 
artists, these are innate qualities that make success ful serial entrepreneurs a rare breed. Relentless 
execution is also something that is hard to get from  a book. It is best learned by being thrown out of 
the offices of countless prospective customers as you try to learn what appeals to them. It means 
getting off the floor and going back to a customer who said “no” and finding out how to turn that into 
a “yes.”  
This book will point the way. Completing your own hero’s journey is up to you. 
 
 
 
Who Is This Book Not For? 
There are cases where using the Customer Development methodology is inappropriate.  There 
are businesses where the aphorism “build and they will come” is actually true. For example, in 
biotechnology startups, if you could can find a drug which cures a specific cancer, a Customer 
Development strategy is simply a wa ste of time; it doesn’t take a formal process to figure out that 
there will be huge end user demand for the drug.   
The risk in biotechnology companies is in the front-end of product development; taking a 
research hypothesis and developing  into a successful and effective drug, not in the back-end  of 
customer acceptance and adoption.  In a biotec hnology startup success and failure are not about 
understanding customer needs or adoption.  If the company can develop a product that works and 
get it through the FDA approval process, cust omers would literally be dying to get it.   
In these companies to get to a Phase III trial (for  Controlled Safety and Efficacy, the last step 
before submitting a New Drug Application to the FDA) , a company has typically spent four and a 
half years in clinical trials and nearly $50 mill ion.  For these ventures, the issue isn’t Customer 
Development to understand end user needs, but rather finding the right Partner, Licensing and 
Distribution Channel strategies.   
Similar issues can be found in some health care and energy products.  The users and markets are 
known and if a product can development business is a ssured.  However, our contention is that in the 
past, most entrepreneurs in every early stage venture believed that “build it and they will come” 
described their company.  Our contention is that it only covers the few, not the many. 
For the rest of us, where the issues are customer acceptance and market adoption, this book 
shows the path. 
  
 

 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 1 Chapter 1 
The Path to Disaster:  
The Product Development Model 
“… for the gate is wide and the road broad  that leads to destruction, and those  
who enter through it are many.” 
— Matthew 7:13 
Every traveler starts a journey faced with the decision of what road to take. The road well traveled 
seems like the obvious choice. The same is true in the search for startup succe ss: following a path of 
common wisdom – one taken by scores of startups before, seems like the right way. Yet the advice 
offered two thousand years ago is relevant for startu ps today, namely that the wide road often leads 
straight to disaster. How and why this is so is the subject of this chapter.  
Let me begin with a cautionary tale. In the heyd ay of the dot-com bubble, Webvan stood out as 
one of the most electrifying new startups, with an idea that would potentially touch every household. 
Raising one of the largest financial war chests ever seen (over $800 million in private and public 
capital), the company aimed to revolutionize the $450 billion retail grocery business with online 
ordering and same-day delivery of household gr oceries. Webvan believed this was a “killer 
application” for the Internet. No longer would people have to leave their homes to shop.  They could 
just point, click, and order. Webvan’s CEO told ForbesT magazine that Webvan would “set the rules 
for the largest consumer sector in the economy.”  
Besides amassing megabucks, th e Webvan entrepreneurs seemed to do everything right. The 
company raced to build vast automated warehouses  and purchased fleets of delivery trucks, while 
building an easy-to-use web site. Webvan hired a seasoned CEO from the consulting industry, 
backed by experienced venture capital investors. What’s more, most of their initial customers 
actually liked their service. Barely 24 months af ter the initial public offering, Webvan was bankrupt 
and out of business. What happened? 
It wasn’t a failure of execution. Webvan did everything its board and investors asked. In 
particular, the company fervently followed the traditional product development model commonly 
used by startups, including “get big fast,” the mant ra of the time.  Webvan management followed the 
product development model religiously. Its failure to ask “Where Are the Customers?” illuminates 
how a tried-and-true model can lead even the best-funded, best-managed startup to disaster.  
THE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT DIAGRAM  
Every company bringing a new product to market uses some form of Product Development Model. 
(Figure 1.1)   Emerging early in the twentieth century, this product-centric model described a 
process that evolved in manufacturing industries . It was adopted by the consumer packaged goods 
industry in the 1950s and spread to the technology business in the last quarter of the twentieth 
century. It has become an integral part of startup culture.  
At first glance, the diagram appears helpful and be nign, illustrating the process of getting a new 
product into the hands of waiting customers.  Ironically, the model is a good fit  when launching a 
new product into an established, well-defined market where the basis of competition is understood, 
and its customers are known.  
The irony is that few startups fit these criteria . Few even know what their market is. Yet they 
persist in using the product development model not only to manage product development, but as a 
road map for finding customers and to time th eir sales launch and revenue plan. The model has 
 
 
2 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   become a catchall tool for every startup executiv e’s schedule, plan, and budget. Investors use the 
product development diagram to set and plan funding. Everyone involved uses a road map that was 
designed for a very different location, yet they are surprised when they end up lost. 
  
 
Figure 1.1  The Product Development Diagram 
To see what’s wrong with using the product develo pment model as a guide to building a startup, 
let’s first look at how the model is currently used to launch a new product. We’ll view the actions at 
each step in two ways: in general practice and in the specific example of Webvan, which managed to 
burn through $800 million in 3 years. Then we will dissect the model’s toxic consequences for 
startups. 
What’s wrong with the old model in general, and how were those wrongs compounded in the 
billion-dollar Webvan implosion?  Lets look at the model stage-by-stage.  
 
Concept and Seed Stage 
In the Concept and Seed Stage, founders capture their passion and vision for the company and turn 
them into a set of key ideas, which quickly beco mes a business plan, sometimes on the back of the 
proverbial napkin. The first thing captured and wrestled to paper is the company’s vision.  
Next, issues surrounding the product need to be defined: What is the product or service concept? 
Is it possible to build? Is further technical research needed to ensure that the product can be built? 
What are the product features and benefits?  
Second, who will the customers be and where will they be found? Statistical and market research 
data plus potential customer interviews determine whether the ideas have merit.  
Step three probes how the product will ultimately reach the customer and the potential 
distribution channel. At this stage that companies start thinking about who their competitors are, 
and how they differ. They draw their first position ing chart and use it to explain the company and its 
benefits to venture capitalists.  
The distribution discussion le ads to some basic a ssumptions about pricing. Combined with 
product costs, an engineering budget, and schedule s, this results in a spreadsheet that faintly 
resembles the first fi nancial plan in the company’s business plan. If the startup is to be backed by 
venture capitalists, the financial mo del has to be alluring as well as believable. If it’s a new division 
inside a larger company, forecasts talk about retu rn on investment.  Creative writing, passion, and 
shoe leather combine in this concept and seed phase in hopes of convincing an investor to fund the 
company or the new division. 
Webvan did all of this extremely well. Founded in  December 1996, with a compelling story, and a 
founder with a track record, Webvan raised $10 million from leading Silicon Valley venture 
capitalists in 1997. In the next two years, addit ional private rounds totaling an unbelievable $393 
million would follow before the company’s IPO (initial public offering). 
 
 
Product Development 
In stage two, product development, everyone stops talking and starts working. The respective departments go to their virtual corners as the company begins to specialize by functions.  
Engineering focuses on building the product; it designs the product, specifies the first release 
and hires a staff to build the product. It takes the simple box labeled “product development” and 
makes detailed critical path method charts, with key milestones. With that information in hand, 
Engineering estimates delivery dates and development costs.  Concept/ 
Seed Product 
Development Alpha/Beta 
Test Launch/ 
1st Ship 
 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 3 Meanwhile, Marketing refines the size of the market defined in the business plan (a market is a 
set of companies with common attributes), and begi ns to target the first customers. In a well-
organized startup (one with a fondness for process) the marketing folk might even run a focus group or two on the market they think they are in and prepare a Marketing Requirements Document 
(MRD) for Engineering. Marketing starts to build a sales demo, writes sales materials 
(presentations, data sheets), and hires a PR agency. In this stage, or by alpha test, the company 
traditionally hires a VP of Sales. 
In Webvan’s case, Engineering moved along two fronts: building  the automated warehouses and 
designing the web site. The automated warehouses we re a technological marvel , far beyond anything 
existing grocery chains had. Automated conveyors and carousels transported food items off of the 
warehouse shelves to workers who packed them for delivery. Webvan also designed its own inventory 
management, warehouse management, route management, an d materials handling systems and 
software to manage the entire customer ordering and delivery flow process. This software 
communicated with the Webvan web site and issued instructions to the various mechanized areas of 
the distribution center to fulfill orders. Once a de livery was scheduled, a route-planning feature of 
the system determined the most efficient route to deliver goods to the customer's home. 
At the same time, the planning began for a marketing and promotion program designed to 
strengthen the Webvan brand name, get customers to try the service in the first target market, build 
strong customer loyalty, and maximize repeat usage and purchases. The plan was to build Webvan’s 
brand name and customer loyalty through public  relations programs, advertising campaign, and 
promotional activities.  
 
 
Alpha/Beta Test 
In stage three, alpha/beta test, Engineering works with a small group of outside users to make sure 
that the product works as specified and tests it for bugs. Marketing develops a complete marketing 
communications plan, provides Sales with a full complement of support material, and starts the 
public relations bandwagon rolling. The PR agency polishes the positioning and starts contacting the 
long lead-time press while Marketin g starts the branding activities. 
Sales signs up the first beta customers (who volunteer to pay for the privilege of testing a new 
product), begins to build the selected distribution channel, and staffs and scales the sales 
organization outside the headquarters. The venture investors start measuring progress by number of 
orders in place by first customer ship. 
Hopefully, somewhere around this point the investors are happy with the company’s product and 
its progress with customers, and the investors are thinking of bringing in more money. The CEO 
refines his or her fund-raising pitch and hits the street and the phone searching for additional 
capital. 
Webvan began to beta-test its grocery delivery  service in May 1999 to approximately 1,100 
people. At the same time, the marketing buzz star ted with a PR blitz as hundreds of articles 
appeared touting the newest entrant in the online grocery business. Private investors poured 
hundreds of millions of do llars into the company. 
 
 
Product Launch and First Customer Ship 
Product launch and first customer ship is the final step in this model, and what the company has 
been driving for. With the product working (sort of), the company goes into “big bang” spending 
mode. Sales is heavily building and staffing a na tional sales organization ; the sales channel has 
quotas and sales goals. Marketing is at its peak. The company has a large press event, and 
Marketing launches a series of programs to cre ate end-user demand (trade shows, seminars, 
advertising, email, and so on). The board begi ns measuring the company’s performance on sales 
execution against its business plan (which typicall y was written a year or more earlier, when the 
entrepreneur was looking for initial investments).  
Building the sales channel and supporting the ma rketing can burn a lot of cash. Assuming no 
early liquidity (via an IPO or merger) for the company, more fund raising is required. The CEO looks 
 
 
4 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   at the product launch activities and the scale-up of the sales and marketing team, and yet again goes 
out, palm up, to the investor community. (In the dot-com bubble economy, the investors used an IPO 
at product launch to take the money and run, before  there was a track record of success or failure.) 
If you’ve ever been involved in a startup, the operational model no doubt sounds familiar. It is a 
product-centric and process-centric model used by countless startups to take their first product to 
market. 
Webvan launched its first regional Webstore in June 1999 (just one month after starting beta 
test) and filed for its public offering 60 days la ter. The company raised $400 million and had a 
market capitalization of $8.5 billion the day of it s IPO—larger than the top three grocery chains 
combined. 
WHAT’S WRONG WITH THIS PICTURE ? 
Given that the product development model is used  by almost every organi zation launching a new 
product, asking what’s wrong with it might s eem as heretical as asking “What’s wrong with 
breathing?” Nevertheless, for Webvan and thousands of other startups, it has failed miserably.  
The first hint lies in its name; this is a product development  model. Not a marketing model, not a 
sales hiring model, not a customer acquisition model, not even a financing model. Yet startup 
companies have traditionally used a product deve lopment model to manage and pace all these non-
engineering activities. The misnamed process is merely a hint of the ten major flaws of the product 
development model.  
 
1. Where Are the Customers? TP 
PT 
To begin with, the product development diagram completely ignores the fundamental truth about 
startups and all new products. The greatest risk—and hence the greatest cause of failure—in 
startups is not in the development of the new product but in the development of customers  and 
markets. Startups don’t fail because they lack a product; they fail because they lack customers and a 
proven financial model.  This alone should be a pretty good clue about what’s wrong with using the 
product development diagram as the sole guide to what a startup needs to be doing. Look at the 
Product Development model and ask “where are the customers?”  
 
2. The Focus on First Customer Ship Date 
Using the Product Development model forces sales and marketing to focus on the first customer ship date. Most competent sales and marketing executives look at the first customer ship date, look at the 
calendar on the wall, and then work backwards figuring out how to do their job in time so that the 
fireworks start the day the product is launched. 
The flaw in this thinking is that the “first customer ship” is only the date when Product 
Development thinks they are “finished” building th e product. The first customer ship date does not 
mean that the company understands its customers or how to market or sell to them. (Read the 
preceding sentence again.  It’s a big idea.) Yet in  almost every startup, ready or not, the sales, 
marketing, and business developm ent people are busy setting their departmental watches to the 
first customer ship date. Even worse, a startup’s investors are managing thei r financial expectations 
by this date as well. 
The chorus of investor voices say, “Why of course that’s what you do. Getting the product to 
market is what sales and marketing people do in startups. That’s how a startup makes money.” 
That’s deadly bad advice.  Ignore it. Focusing only on first customer ship results in a “Fire, Ready, 
Aim” strategy. Obviously, your new division or company wants to get a product to market and sell it, 
but that cannot be done until you understand  who  you are selling your product to and why they will 
buy it. The product development model is so focuse d on building and shipping the product that it 
ignores the entire process of what I call Customer Discovery —a fundamental and, in fact, fatal error.  
Think about every startup you’ve been in or known about. Hasn’t the focus been on first 
customer ship dates? Hasn’t the energy, drive, and focus been on finishing the product and getting it 
to market? Think about what happens after the first customer ship party is over, the champagne is 
 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 5 flat, and the balloons are deflated. Sales now has to find the quantity of customers that the company 
claimed it could find when it first wrote its busi ness plan. Sure, Sa les may have found a couple of 
“beta” customers, but were they representative of a scalable mainstream market? (A mainstream market is where the majority of people in any market segment reside.  They tend to be risk-averse, 
pragmatic purchasers.)  Time after time, only after first customer sh ip do startups discover that 
their early customers don’t scale into a mainstream market, or that the product doesn’t solve a high 
value problem, or that the cost of distribution is  too high. While that’s bad enough, these startups 
are now burdened with an expensive, scaled-up sales organization that is getting frustrated trying to 
execute a losing sales strategy and a marketing organization desperately trying to create demand 
without a true understanding of customers’ needs. And as Marketing and Sales flail around in 
search of a sustainable market the company is burning through its most precious asset—cash.  
At Webvan, the dot-com mania may have intensified their inexorable drive to first customer ship, 
but its single-minded focus was typi cal of most startups. At first customer ship, Webvan had close to 
400 employees. It hired over 500 more during the next six months. By May 1999 the company opened 
its first $40 million distribution center, built and sc aled for a customer base it could only guess at, 
and had committed to 15 other distribution center s of the same size. Wh y? Because the Webvan 
business plan said that was th e goal—regardless of whether the customer results agreed. 
 
3.  An Emphasis on Execution Inst ead of Learning and Discovery 
In startups the emphasis is on “get it done, and get it done fast.” So it’s natural that heads of Sales 
and Marketing believe they are hired for what they know, not what they can learn.  They assume 
their prior experience is relevant in this new venture.  Therefore they need to put that knowledge to 
work and execute the sales and marketing programs that have worked for them before.   
This is usually a faulty assumption.  Before we can sell a product, we have to ask and answer 
some very basic questions: What are the problems that our product solves? Do customers perceive 
these problems that as important or “must have?” If we’re selling to busi nesses, who in a company 
has a problem that our product could solve?  If we  are selling to consumers how do we reach them?  
How big is this problem? Who do we make the first sales call on? Who else has to approve the 
purchase? How many customers do we need to be profitable? What’s the average order size?  
Most entrepreneurs will tell you “I know all the an swers already.  Why do I have to go do it 
again.”  It’s human nature that what you think yo u know is not always what you know.  A little 
humility go far.  Your past experience may not be relevant for your new com pany.  If you really do 
know the answers to the customer questions, the Customer Development process will go quickly and 
it will reaffirm your understanding. 
A company needs to answer these questions before it can successfully ramp  up sales and sell. For 
startups in a new market, these are not merely execution  activities; they are learning and discovery 
activities that are critical to the company’s success or failure.  
Why is this distinction important? Take another look at the product development diagram. 
Notice it has a nice linear flow fr om left to right. Product development, whether it is intended for 
large companies or consumers, is a step-by-step, execution-oriented process. Each step happens in a 
logical progression that can be PERT charted, (a  project management technique for determining how 
much time a project needs before it is completed,)  with milestones and re sources assigned to 
completing each step. 
Yet anyone who has ever taken a new product out to a set of potential customers can tell you 
that a good day in front of customers is two steps forward and one step back. In fact, the best way to 
represent what happens outside the building is more  like a series of recurs ive circles—recursive to 
represent the iterative nature of what actually happens in a learning and discovery environment. 
Information and data are gathered about customer s and markets incrementally, one step at a time. 
Yet sometimes those steps ta ke you in the wrong direction or down  a blind alley. You find yourself 
calling on the wrong customers, not understanding why people will buy, not understanding what 
product features are important. The ability to le arn from those missteps is what distinguishes a 
successful startup from those whose names are forgotten among the vanished.  
Like all startups focused on executing to plan, Webvan hired a vice president of merchandising, a 
vice president of marketing and a vice president of product management—three groups that were 
 
 
6 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   oriented around executing a sales strategy, not learning and discovering customer needs. Sixty days 
after first customer ship these three groups employed over fifty people. 
  
4. The Lack of Meaningful Mileston es for Sales, Marketing and Business 
Development 
The one great thing you can say about the product development methodology is that it provides an 
unambiguous structure with clearly defined milest ones. The meaning of alpha test, beta test, and 
first customer ship are pretty obvious to most engineers. If the product fails to work, you stop and fix 
it. In stark contrast, sales and marketing activities before first customer ship are adhoc, fuzzy, and 
absent measurable, concrete objectives. They lack any way to stop and fix what’s broken (or even to 
know if it is broken, or how to stop at all). 
What kind of objectives would a startup want or need? That’s the key question. Most sales 
executives and marketers tend to focus on executio n activities because at le ast these are measurable. 
For example, in sales, the number one thing that matters is revenue. Sales uses revenue as its 
marker of progress in understanding customers. Some startup sales execs also believe hiring the core 
sales team is a key objective. Others focus on acquiring early “lighthouse” customers (prominent 
customers who will attract others.)  Marketers believe creating corporate presentation, data sheets, 
and collateral are objectives. Some think that hiri ng a PR agency, starting the buzz and getting on 
the cover of magazines at launch are objectives.  
In reality none of these are true objectives. Simply put, a startup should focus on reaching a deep 
understanding of customers and their problems, discovering a repeatable road map of how they buy, 
and building a financial model that results in profitability.  
The appropriate milestones that measure a startup’s progress answers these questions: How well 
do we understand what problems customers have? How much will they pay to solve those problems? 
Do our product features solve these problems? Do we understand our customers’ business? Do we 
understand the hierarchy of customer needs? Have we found visionary customers, ones who will buy 
our product early? Is our product a must-have for these customers? Do we understand the sales road 
map well enough to consistently sell the product? Do we understand what we need to be profitable? 
Are the sales and business plans realistic, scalable, and achievable? What do we do if our model 
turns out to be wrong? 
Webvan had no milestones that said stop and ev aluate the results (2,000 orders per day versus 
8,000 forecasted) of its product launch. Before an y meaningful customer feedback was in hand, and 
only a month after the product started shipping, Webvan signed a one billion dollar deal (yes, 
$1,000,000,000) with Bechtel. The company committed to the construction of up to 26 additional 
distribution centers over the next three years. 
Webvan had leaped right over learning and discovery in its rush to execution. There is a big 
difference between a process that emphasizes getting answers to the fundamental questions that I’ve 
listed above and a process that uses the product development model to keep early sales and 
marketing activities in sync with first customer  ship. To see what I me an, consider the product 
development diagram from th e perspective of people in sales and marketing.  
 
5. The Use of a Product Development Methodology to Measure Sales  
Using the product development diagram for Customer Development activities is like using a clock to tell the temperature. They both measure something, but not the thing you wanted.  
Figure 1.2 shows what the product development diagram looks like from a sales perspective. A 
VP of Sales looks at the diagram and says, “Hmm, if beta test is on this date, I’d better get a small 
sales team in place before that date to acquire my fi rst ‘early customers.’ And if  first customer ship is 
on this date over here, then I need to hire and staff a sales organization by then.” Why? “Well, 
because the revenue plan we promised the investors shows us generating customer revenue from the 
day of first customer ship.” 
 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 7  
Figure 1.2  The View from the Sales Organization 
I hope this thinking already sounds inane to you. The plan calls for selling in volume the day 
Engineering is finished building the product. Wh at plan says that? Why, the business plan, which 
uses the product development model to set milestones. The consequence is that selling isn’t 
predicated on discovering the right market or whether any customers will shell out cash for your 
product. Instead you use product development to time your readiness to sell. This “ready or not, here 
we come” attitude means that you won’t know if th e sales strategy and plan actually work until after 
first customer ship. What’s the consequence if your  stab at a sales strategy is wrong? You’ve built a 
sales organization that’s burning cash, cash that needs to be redirected in a hurry. No wonder the 
half-life of a startup VP of Sales is about nine mont hs post first customer ship .  “Build and they will 
come,” is not a strategy, it’s a prayer. 
Webvan had this problem in spades. After firs t customer ship, Webvan had a nasty surprise 
waiting for it. Customers refused to behave the wa y the Webvan business plan said they would. Six 
months after Webvan’s June 1999 launch, the averag e daily volume of orders was 2,500 orders per 
day. Sounds pretty good? Not bad for a startup? It was. Unfortunately, th e Webvan business plan 
had forecast 8,000 orders per day, a number that was necessary for the company to achieve 
profitability. This meant that its distribution cent er (designed to process product volumes equivalent 
to approximately 18 supermarkets) was operating at less than 30% of capacity. Oops. 
 
 
6. The Use of a Product Development Methodology to Measure Marketing  
The head of Marketing looks at the same product development diagram and sees something quite different (see Figure 1.3). For Mark eting, first customer ship means feeding the sales pipeline with a 
constant stream of customer prospects. To create this demand at first customer ship, marketing 
activities start early in the product development process. While the product is being engineered, 
Marketing starts creating corporate presentations and sales materials. Implicit in these materials is 
the “positioning” of the company and product. Looking ahead to the product launch, the marketing 
group hires a public relations agency to refine th e positioning and to begin generating early “buzz” 
about the company. The PR agency helps the co mpany understand and influence key industry 
analysts, luminaries, and references. All this leads up  to a flurry of press events and interviews, all 
geared to the product launch date. (During the Internet bubble, one more function of the marketing 
department was to “buy” customer loyalty with enormous advertising and promotion spending to 
create a brand.)  
 
Figure 1.3  The View from the Marketing Organization 
At first glance this process may look quite reasonable, except for one small item: all this 
marketing activity occurs before customers start buying—that is, be fore Sales has had a chance to 
actually test the positioning, marketing strategy, or demand-creation activities in front of real 
customers. In fact, all the marketing plans are made  in a virtual vacuum of real customer feedback Hire First 
Sales Staff Build Sales 
Organization 
Concept/ 
Seed Product 
DevelopmentAlpha/Beta 
Test Launch/ 
1st Ship 
 
- Create Marcom 
Materials 
-C r e a t e  P o s i t i o n i n g- Hire PR Agency 
- Early Buzz - Create Demand 
- Launch Event 
-“ B r a n d i n g” 
Concept/ 
Seed  Product 
Development Alpha/Beta 
Test Launch/ 
1st Ship 
 
 
 
8 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   and information. Of course, smart marketers have some early interaction with customers before the 
product ships, but if they do, it’s on their own initiative, not as part of a well-defined process. Most 
first-time marketers spend a large part of their time behind their desks inside their building. This is somewhat amazing, since in a startup no facts exist inside the building, only opinions. Yet even if we 
get the marketing people to get out from behind thei r desks into the field, th e deck is still stacked 
against their success. Look at the product development diagram. When does Marketing find out 
whether the positioning, buzz, and demand creation activities actually work? After first customer 
ship. The inexorable march to this date has no iterative loop that says, “If our assumptions are 
wrong, maybe we need to try something different.”  
This “marketing death march” happened at Webvan . In its first six months  of business, Webvan 
acquired an impressive 47,000 new customers. However, in those six months 71% of the 2,000 orders 
per day that were coming in were from customer s who had already used the service. This meant 
Webvan needed more new customers, and it needed to reduce the number of customers who ordered 
once and then never used the service again. 
These facts contradicted the marketing assumptions in the original business plan. As happens in 
most startups, those assumptions we re wrong. Yet Webvan had scaled  its spending (particularly on 
building and operating large distribution centers) on these unverified guesses.  
 
7. Premature Scaling 
Having Sales and Marketing believe that by first customer ship, come hell or high water, they need 
fully staffed organizations leads to an other disaster: premature scaling.   
Startup executives have three documents to guid e their hiring and staffing; a business plan, a 
product development model and a revenue forecast.  All of these are execution documents – they 
document spending and hiring as if  success is assured.  As mentione d earlier there are no milestones 
that say “stop or slow down hiring until you understand customers.”  Even the most experienced 
executives succumb to the inexorable pressure to hire and staff to “plan” regardless of early customer 
feedback.   
In Webvan’s case premature scaling was an integral part of the company culture and the 
prevailing venture capital “get big fast” mantra . Webvan spent $18 million to develop proprietary 
software and $40 million to set up its first automate d warehouse before it had shipped a single item. 
Premature scaling had dire consequences since Webvan’s spending was on a scale that ensures it 
will be taught in busi ness school case studie s for years to come.  
As customer behavior continued to differ from the predictions in Webvan’s business plan, the 
company slowly realized that it had overbuilt and over-designed. The business model made sense 
only at the high volumes predicted on the spreadsheet. The average daily volume of orders was 
significantly below the capacity the company needed to achieve profitability.  To have any hope of 
achieving favorable gross margins, Webvan had to find a way to substantially increase its volume, 
the number of customers, the number of orders placed by its customers, and the average order size. 
 
8. Death Spiral: The Cost of Getting Product Launch Wrong 
Premature scaling is the immediate cause of the Death Spiral.  Premature scaling causes the 
burn rate to accelerate.  Sales, salaries, facilities, infrastruc ture costs, recruiting fees, and travel 
expenses start cutting into the company’s cash fl ow. The pressure for reve nue grows exponentially. 
Meanwhile the marketing department is spending large sums on creating demand for the sales 
organization. It is also spending “credibility capi tal” on positioning and explaining the company to 
the press, analysts, and customers. 
By the time of first customer ship, if the company does not understand its market and customers, 
the consequences unfold in a startup ritual, almo st like a Japanese Noh play. What happens when 
you fully staff sales and marketing and you haven’ t nailed who your customers are and why they 
should buy your product? Sales starts missing it s numbers. The board gets concerned. The VP of 
Sales comes to a board meeting, st ill optimistic, and provides a set of reasonable explanations. The 
board raises a collective eyebrow. The VP goes back to the field and exhorts the troops to work 
harder.  
 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 9 Meanwhile, the salespeople start inventing and testing their own alternatives—different 
departments to call on, different versions of the presentations. Instead of a methodology of learning 
and discovering, the sales team has turned into a disorganized and disgruntled mob burning lots of 
cash. Back in the home office, the product presentation slides are changing weekly (sometimes daily) 
as Marketing tries to “make up a better story” and sends out the latest pitch to a confused sales 
organization. Morale in the field and in Marketing starts to plummet. Salespeople begin to believe 
“This product cannot be sold; no one wants to buy it.” Management fires the VP of Sales and a few 
salespeople leave. Then a new VP of Sales comes in and starts the process all over again. 
By the next board meeting, the sales numbers st ill aren’t meeting plan. The VP of Sales looks 
down at his shoes and shuffles his feet. Now the board raises both eyebrows and looks quizzically at 
the CEO. The VP of Sales, forehead bathed in sweat, leaves the board meeting and has a few heated 
motivational sessions with the sale s team. By the next board meeting, if the sales numbers are still 
poor, the writing is on the wall. Not only haven’t the sales numbers been made, but now the CEO is 
sweating the company’s continued cash burn rate. Why? Because the company has based its 
headcount and expenditures on the expectation that Sales will bring in revenue according to plan. 
The rest of the organization (product developmen t, marketing, support) all started to burn more 
cash, expecting Sales to make its numbers. Now the company is in crisis mode. Here two things 
typically happen. First, the VP of Sales is toast. At the final board meeting no one wants to stand 
next to him. People are moving their chairs to the other side of the room. Having failed to deliver the 
numbers, he’s history. Whether it takes three board meetings or a year is irrelevant; the VP of Sales 
in a startup who does not make the numbers is call ed an ex-VP of Sales ( unless he was a founder, 
and then he gets to sit in a penalty box with a nebulous VP title). 
Next, the new VP of Sales is hired. She quickly comes to the conclusion that the company just did 
not understand its customers and how to sell to th em. She decides that the company’s positioning 
and marketing strategy were incorrect. Now the VP of Marketing starts sweating. Since the new VP 
of Sales was brought on board to “f ix” sales, the marketing department has to react and interact with 
someone who believes that whatever was created earlier in the company was wrong. The new VP of 
Sales reviews the strategy and tactics that did not work and comes up with a new sales plan. She 
gets a brief honeymoon of a few months from the CEO and the board. In the meantime, the original 
VP of Marketing is trying to come up with a ne w positioning strategy to support the new Sales VP. 
Typically this results in conflict, if not outright internecine warfare. If the sales aren’t fixed in a 
short time, the next executive to be looking for a job is not the new VP of Sales (she hasn’t been 
around long enough to get fired), it’s the VP of Marketing—the rationale being “We changed the VP 
of Sales, so that can’t be the problem. It must be Marketing’s fault.” 
Sometimes all it takes is one or two iterations of finding the right sales road map and marketing 
positioning to get a startup on the right track of finding exuberant customers. Unfortunately, more 
often than not, this is just the beginning of an  executive death spiral. If changing the sales and 
marketing execs doesn’t put the company on the right sales trajectory, the investors start talking the 
“we need the right CEO for this phase” talk. This means the CEO is walking around with an 
unspoken corporate death sentence. Moreover, since the first CEO was likely to have been one of the 
founders, the trauma of CEO removal begins. Typically, founding CEOs hold on to the doorframe of 
their offices as the investors try to pry their finger s off the company. It’s painful to watch and occurs 
in more than half of the startups with first-time CEOs.  
In flush economic times the company may get two or three iterations around a failed launch and 
bad sales numbers. In tougher times investors are tighter with their wallets and are making the 
“tossing good money after bad” calculations with a fr ugal eye. A startup might simply not get a next 
round of funding and have to shut down. 
In Webvan’s case, the death spiral was public an d messy, since none of th is was occurring in the 
intimate enclosure of a private company. The conseq uence of going public was that the sea of red ink 
was printed quarterly for all to see. Rather than  realize that the model was unrealistic and scale 
back, the company continued to invest heavily in marketing and promotion (to get more customers 
and keep the ones they had) and distribution facilities (building new ones in new parts of the country 
to reach more customers). By the end of 2000 We bvan had accumulated a deficit of $612.7 million 
and was hemorrhaging cash. Seven months later, it was bankrupt. 
 
 
 
10 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   9. Not All Startups Are Alike 
A fundamental truth about startups that is completely ignored in the product development model is 
that they are not all alike. One of the radical insights that guides this book is that startups fall into 
one of four basic categories:  
• Bringing a new product into an existing market  
• Bringing a new product into a new market  
• Bringing a new product into an existing market and trying to resegment that market as a  
low-cost entrant  
• Bringing a new product into an existing market and trying to resegment that market as a 
niche entrant  
These differences will be developed in more detail in subsequent chapters. What’s important to 
know now is that the traditional product development model at times succeeds in getting a product 
out the door into a known market with known customers (choice 1). Executing past practices in this 
Market Type may work if  the market is similar to  past experiences. However,  since the majority of 
startups are not going after known markets (falling into the second and third categories), they don’t 
have a clue where their customers are.  
Webvan fell into the fourth category of startu p—one that was bringing a new product (online 
grocery ordering and same day delivery) into an existing market (the grocery business), and trying to 
create a niche of that market. One could even make the argument that Webvan’s idea was so radical 
that the company fell into the second category of startups - bringing a new product into a completely 
new market. In either case, Webvan’s ability to predict customer acceptance and widespread usage 
was not based on any facts, just untested business plan hypotheses. (Modeling customer adoption 
rates using traditional quantitative models like Ba ss Curve are impossible at first customer ship for 
category 2 and 3 companies. There aren’t sufficient initial sales data to make valid sales predictions.) 
Here’s the point. Since the four types of startups have very different rates of customer adoption 
and acceptance, their sales and marketing strategies differ dramatically. Even more serious, is that 
each Market Type have radically different cash ne eds.  A company creating a new market might be 
unprofitable for 5 or more years, while one in an existing market might be generating cash in 12-18 
months.  As a result, the product development model is  not only useless, it is dangerous. It tells the 
finance, marketing and sales teams nothing about how to uniquely describe and sell for each type of 
startup, nor how to predict the resources needed for success.   
 
10. Unrealistic Expectations 
I’ve argued that the product development model le ads to fundamental and often fatal errors in the 
first year or two of a startup’s life. We can sum up these errors in terms of three unrealistic 
expectations: 
• That the product development diagram can be relied upon to guide activities that have 
nothing to do with product development—namely, finding customers, a market, and a viable 
business model.  
• That Customer Development will move on the same schedule as product development.  
• That all types of startups and all new products will achieve acceptance and deployment at 
the same rate, namely starti ng at First Customer Ship. 
In addition to these three errors, there is one mo re.  Startups face enormous pressure from their 
investors to become profitable.  Sometimes, to get funded, these new ventures make unrealistic 
financial assumptions – about market size, growth or simply ignoring the consequences of the 
Market Type they have chosen. These optimistic expectations become the plan of record, forcing 
execution towards unrealistic  and unachievable goals. 
Webvan made all of these mistakes, visibly and pu blicly. Yet most observers wrote off its failure 
as just one of the many “dot-com busts,” attributin g the venture’s demise to something related to the 
Internet. The reality is more profound and german e. Webvan and the entire dot-com collapse were 
the result of falling victim to the three expectations I’ve just described; “build it and the customers 
will come,” (regardless of the number of do llars raised) is not a successful strategy. 
 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 11  
SO WHAT’S THE ALTERNATIVE ? 
If the product development diagram isn’t an approp riate road map for startups, what is? To some, 
the phrase “thoughtful startup sales and marketing process” is an oxymoron. However, there are 
entrepreneurs who have been searching for a temp late for success with customers and markets.  
Since the early 1990s, the closest thing to a Holy  Grail for sales and marketing activities in 
startups has been the Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve and the notion of The Chasm.  
 
 
The Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve 
The Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve (see Figure 1.4) was developed by Everett Rogers and popularized and refined with the notion of the “c hasm” by Geoff Moore. It introduces entrepreneurs 
to five thought-provoking ideas:  
 
• Technology is adopted in phases approach by  distinct groups: technology enthusiasts, 
visionaries, pragmatists, co nservatives, and skeptics. 
• The first two groups, the technology enthusiasts and visionaries, are the “early market.” The 
next two groups, the pragmatists and conservatives, are the “mainstream market.” 
• The shape of the overall market for any product approximates a bell curve. The early market 
starts small and grows exponentially into the mainstream market. 
• There is a “chasm” between each of the different groups, with the largest chasm being 
between the early market and the mainstream market. These chasms are caused by the different product needs and buyi ng habits of each group.  
• The biggest problem in crossing the chasm is that few of the hard-won early marketing and 
selling lessons and success can be leveraged into the mainst ream market, as mainstream 
customers do not find early adopters as credible customer references.  Therefore, completely 
new marketing and sales strategies are necessary to win over this next, much larger group of 
customers.  
 
Figure 1.4  The Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve 
Let’s briefly consider why this notion doesn’t provide a good ro ad map for early-stage startups. 
With this last piece in place, we’ll be ready to co nsider the alternative path that this book describes, 
and that I assert all successful startups follow. An entrepreneur on day one of a startup looks 
longingly at the graceful bell curve depicted in Figure 1.4, dreaming  of marching her company to the 
pinnacle, determined to avoid those fearsome  chasms. Ok, this all sounds good. Now what? 
Entrepreneurs should take a good long look at the Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve. Is it 
informative? Interesting? Does it lead you to th ink profound and wonderful thoughts about strategy? 
Well, forget it. If you are just starting your company this is the last time you are going to see this 
curve, at least for the next year. The problems you face occur much earlier than any chasm. In fact, 
you should be so lucky to be dea ling with chasm-crossing activities, for they are a sign of success.  
 
 
 
12 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   The Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve does provide true insight, because there really are 
different types of customers in a company/product life cycle. However, th is seductive curve leads 
early-stage entrepreneurs to four bad conclusions.  
First, the curve naturally leads entrepreneurs to  entertain dreams of glory in the mainstream 
market. In the early stages of building a company, those dreams are best forgotten. Not forever, but 
for now. Why? The sad reality is that if you don’t get the first part of early Customer Development 
right, you won’t be in the mainst ream. You’ll be ou t of business.  
Second, the curve invites us to think of technology enthusiasts as one part of the customer 
adoption curve. On the curve they look like just an early set of customers, but the reality is that they 
are not. Technology enthusiasts exist as one of those sales puzzles on the path to finding “real” 
paying early customers and a repeatable sales proce ss. You need to deal with them and understand 
their influence in the sales road map, but they vary rarely buy anything. 
Third, the notion that a startup’s customer base will grow in a smooth, continuous curve invites 
the tempting and dangerous idea that customer adoption is simply a sales execution problem. Even 
when the notion of a chasm is added, along with the observation that early market customers and 
mainstream customers are different, only in entrep reneurs’ dreams and busi ness school cases does 
this take the form of a adoption curve. As we will s ee, the actual transition from one type of customer 
to another is at best a step function (and dependent on Market Type.) 
Fourth, the Technology Life Cycle Adoption Curve, along with the books written about it, 
emphasize “execution and adoption.” That’s all fine  and good, but as my grandmother used to say, 
“ Y o u  s h o u l d  b e  s o  l u c k y  t o  h a v e  t h a t  p r o b l e m . ”  In the early stages of a startup, focusing on 
“execution” will put you out of business. Instead, you need a “learning and discovery”  process so you 
can get the company to the point where you know what to execute. 
S o in s t ea d  o f d r e a m in g  u p  w a y s  t o c r os s  t h e c h a s m, the first step for a startup is to focus on 
learning and discovery processes, from starting the company to scaling th e business. Through trial 
and error, hiring and firing, startups that succeed have invented a parallel process to product 
development that is customer-and market-centric,  I call “Customer Development.” 
 
 
Customer Development: Common Sense M eets the Product Development Model  
It’s interesting to imagine what would happen if a startup told its venture capital backers that it had 
hired the world’s best engineering team, but it wasn’t going to use any process or methodology to get 
the product out the door. Can you imagine saying , “Nah, we don’t need no stinking product 
development methodology. We’ll just go by the seat of our pants?” Only in your dreams. Startups use 
a product development methodology to be able to measure the progress of their development team, 
control their cash burn rate and time their product launch. Yet as we have seen, we don’t even think 
twice when we hire the best marketing, sales, and business development talent, toss them into a 
startup and say, “Go figure out who wants to buy th is, and quickly sell a whole bunch. Let us know 
when you are done, but keep it vague and wave  your hands a lot when we ask you how much 
progress you are making.” Seems kind of silly doesn’t it? Yet that’s the state of the startup today. 
There is no recognized process with measurable milestones, for finding customers, developing the 
market, and validating the business model. 
The Customer Development model of a startup st arts with a simple premise: learning and 
discovering who a company’s initial customers will be, and what markets they are in, requires a 
separate and distinct process from product development. The sum of these activities is Customer 
Development. Note that I am making a concerted effort not to call Custom er Development a “sales 
process” or a “marketing process.” The reason will become clearer as we talk  about how to organize 
the team for the Customer Development process in a later chapter. However, early on, we are neither 
selling or marketing. Before any of the traditional functions of selling and marketing can happen, 
the company has to prove that a market could exist,  verify that someone wo uld pay real dollars for 
the solutions the company envisions, and then go out and create the market. These testing, learning, 
and discovery activities are at the heart of what makes a startup unique, and they are what make 
Customer Development so different from the product development process.  
 
Chapter 1: The Path to Disaster   | 13 The Customer Development model is intended to be everything the product development 
diagram is not. Where product development is focused on first customer ship, the Customer 
Development model moves learning about customers and their problems as early in the development 
process as possible. In addition, the model is built on the idea that every startup has a set of 
definable milestones that no amount of funding ca n accelerate. More money is  helpful later, but not 
now. The Internet Bubble was the biggest science experiment in this area. You cannot create a 
market or customer demand where there isn’t any customer interest. The good news is that these 
customer and market milestones can be defined an d measured. The bad news is that accomplishing 
these milestones is an art. It’s an art embodied in the passion and vision of the individuals who work 
to make their vision a reality. That’s  what makes startups so exciting.  
The ironic postscript to the Webvan story is th at another company, Tesco, raced past pioneers 
such as Webvan to become the largest online grocer  in the world. The people at Tesco did not raise a 
huge financial war chest to launch their service. They learned and discovered what customers 
wanted, and they found a financial model that worked. They started their online grocery service by 
using their retail stores in the UK as the launch ing pad. By 2002 they had created a profitable online 
business that was handling 85,000 orders per week  and had racked up more than $559 million in 
sales. Tesco could set up its onli ne grocery business for a fraction of the investment of Webvan 
because it was able to build off its existing infr astructure of over 929 stores. In June 2001 online 
grocery shopping returned to the United States when Tesco moved into the market, purchasing a 
35% investment in Safeway’s online grocery service.  
Explicitly or implicitly, Tesco understood the process embodied by the Customer Development 
model. The next chapter describes this model in detail.  
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany  |    
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany   | 15 Chapter 2 
The Path to Epiphany:  
The Customer Development Model  
How narrow the gate and constricted the road that leads to life. A nd those who find it are few.  
— Matthew 7:14 
The furniture business does not strike many people as a market ripe for innovation. Yet during the 
halcyon days of dot-com companie s (when venture capitalists could not shovel money out the door 
fast enough), the online furnishing market spawne d a series of high profile companies such as 
Furniture.com and Living.com. Operating on the James Dean School of management (living fast and 
dying young), companies like these quickly garnered millions of dollars of investors’ capital and just 
as swiftly flamed out. Meanwhile,  a very different startup by the name of Design Within Reach 
began building its business a brick at a time. What happened, and why, is instructive.  
At a time when the furniture dot-coms were still rolling in investor money, the founder of Design 
Within Reach, Rob Forbes, approached me to help th e company get funding. Rob’s goal was to build a 
catalog business providing easy access to well-desig ned furniture frequently found only in designer 
showrooms. In his twenty years of working as a professional office designer, he realized one of the 
big problems in the furniture industry: for design  professionals and businesses such as hotels and 
restaurants, high-quality designer furniture took four months to ship. Customers repeatedly told 
Rob, “I wish I could buy great-looking furniture wi thout having to wait months to get it.” On a 
shoestring, Rob put together a prin t catalog of furniture (over half the items were exclusive to his 
company) that he carried in stock and ready to sh ip. Rob spent his time lis tening to customers and 
furniture designers. He kept tuning his catalog and inventory to meet designers’ needs, and he 
scoured the world for unique furniture. His fledgling business was starting to take wing; now he 
wanted to raise serious venture capital funding to grow the company. 
 “No problem,” I said. Pulling out my Rolodex and di aling for dollars, I got Rob in to see some of 
the best and the brightest venture capitalists on Sand Hill Road in Silicon Valley. Rob would go 
through his presentation and point out that ther e was a $17.5 billion business-to-business market 
for high-quality, well-designed furnishings. He demo nstrated that the current furniture distribution 
system was archaic, fragmented, and ripe for restructuring, as furniture manufacturers faced a 
convoluted system of reps, dealers, and regional showrooms that prevented direct access to their 
customers. Consumers typically wa ited four months for product and incurred unnecessary markups 
of up to 40%. Listening to Rob speak, it was obvious that he had identified a real problem, had put 
together a product that solved that problem, and had customers verifying that he had the right 
solution by buying from him. 
It was such a compelling presentation that it was a challenge to identify any other industry 
where customers were so poorly served. Yet the reaction from the venture capital firms was 
uniformly negative. “What, no web site? No e-commerce transactions? Where are the branding 
activities? We want to fund web-based startups. Perhaps we’d be interested if you could turn your 
catalog furniture business into an e-commerce site.” Rob kept patiently explaining that his business 
was oriented to what his customers told him they  wanted. Design professi onals wanted to leaf 
through a catalog at their leisure in bed. They wanted to show a catalog to their customers. While he 
wasn’t going to ignore the web, it would be the next step, not the first, in building the business. 
 
 
16 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   “Rob,” the VCs replied sagely, “Furniture.com is one of the hottest dot-coms out there. Together 
they’ve raised over $100 million from first-tier VCs. They and other hot startups like them are 
selling furniture over the web. Come ba ck when you rethink your strategy.”  
I couldn’t believe it: Rob had a te rrific solution to sell and a prov en business model, and no one 
would fund him. Yet like the tenacious entrepreneur  he was, he stubbornly stuck to his guns. Rob 
believed the dot.com furniture industry was based on a false premise, that the business opportunity 
was simply online purchasing of home furnishings. He believed that the underlying opportunity was 
to offer high-quality  products to a select  audience that we re differentiated from those of other 
suppliers, and to get those products to customers quickly. This difference, a select audience versus a 
wide audience, and high-quality furniture versus commodity furniture, was the crucial difference 
between success and massive failure.  
Ultimately, Rob was able to raise money from friends and family and much later got a small 
infusion of venture capital. Fast-forward six year s. Design Within Reach is a thriving $180 million 
public company. It has 56 retail stores and an e-commerce web site. Its brand is well known and 
recognized in the design community. Oh, and Furnit ure.com? It’s already relegated to the dustbin of 
forgotten failures.  
Why did Design Within Reach succeed, when extr emely well funded startups like Furniture.com 
fail? What was it that Rob Forbes knew or did th at made the company a winner? Can others emulate 
his success? 
THE FOUR STEPS TO THE EPIPHANY  
Most startups lack a process for discovering their markets, locating  their first customers, validating 
their assumptions, and growing th eir business. A few successful on es like Design Within Reach do 
all these things. The difference is that the ones th at succeed invent a Customer Development model.  
The Customer Development model, depicted in Figure  2.1, is designed to solve the 10 problems of 
the Product Development model enumerated in Chapter 1.  Its strength is its rigor and flexibility. 
The model separates out all the customer-related activities in the early stage of a company into their 
own processes, designed as four easy-to-understand steps: Customer Discovery, Customer 
Validation, Customer Creation, and Company Building. As you will see, these steps mesh seamlessly 
and support a startup’s ongoing product development activities. Each of them results in specific 
deliverables to be described in subsequent chapters.  
 
The Customer Development model is not a replacement for the Product Development model, but 
a companion.  Broadly speaking, Customer Development focuses on understanding customer 
problems and needs, Customer Validation on deve loping a sales model that can be replicated, 
Customer Creation on creating and driving end user demand, and Company Building on 
transitioning the organization from one designed for learning and discovery to a well-oiled machine 
engineered for execution. As I discuss later in this chapter, integral to this model is the notion that 
Market Type choices affect the way the company will deploy its sales, marketing and financial 
resources.  Company 
BuildingCustome r 
Discovery  Customer
ValidationCustomer 
Creation  
 
Figure 2.1  The Customer Development Model 
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany   | 17 Notice that a major difference between this model and the traditional product development 
model is that each step is drawn as a circular tr ack with recursive arrows. The circles and arrows 
highlight the fact that each step in Customer Development is iterative. That’s a polite way of saying, “Unlike product development, finding the right cu stomers and market is unpredictable, and we will 
screw it up several times before we get it right.” Ex perience with scores of startups shows that only 
in business school case studies does progress with customers happen in a nice linear fashion. The 
nature of finding a market and customers guarantees that you will get it wrong several times. 
Therefore, unlike the product development model, the Customer Development model assumes that it 
will take several iterations of each of the four st eps until you get it right. It’s worth pondering this 
point for a moment, because this philosophy of “It’s OK to screw it up if you plan to learn from it” is 
the heart of the methodology presented in this book.  
In a product development diagram, going backwards is a considered a failure. No wonder most 
startup businesspeople are embarrassed when they are out in the field learning, failing, and learning 
some more. The diagram they’ve used to date says, “G o left to right and you’re a success. Go right to 
left, and you’ll get fired.” No wonder startup sales and marketing efforts tend to move forward even 
when it’s patently obvious that they haven’t nailed the market.  (Imagine trying that philosophy in 
product development for pacemakers or missiles.) 
In contrast, the Customer Development diagram says that going backwards is a natural and 
valuable part of learning and discovery. In this new methodology, you keep cycling through each step 
until you achieve “escape velocity”— that is, until you generate enough success to carry you out and 
into the next step.  
Notice that the circle labeled Customer Validat ion in the diagram has an additional iterative 
loop going back to Customer Discovery. As you’ll s ee later, Customer Validation is a key checkpoint 
in understanding whether you have a product that customers want to buy and a road map of how to 
sell it. If you can’t find enough paying customers in the Customer Validation step, the model returns 
you to Customer Discovery to rediscover what customers want and will pay for.  
An interesting consequence of this process is that it keeps a startup at a low cash burn rate until 
the company has validated its business model by finding paying customers. In the first two steps of 
Customer Development, even an infinite amount of cash is useless, because it can only obscure 
whether you have found a market. (Having raised lo ts of money tempts you to give products away, 
steeply discount to buy early busi ness, etc., all while saying “we’ll make it up later.”  It rarely 
happens that way.)  Since the Customer Develo pment model assumes that most startups cycle 
through these first two steps at least twice, it allows a well-managed company to carefully estimate 
and frugally husband its cash. The company doesn’t build its non-product development teams (sales, 
marketing, business development) until it has proo f in hand (a tested sales road map and valid 
purchase orders) that it has a business worth building. Once that proof is obtained, the company can 
go through the last two steps of Customer Creation and Company Building to capitalize on the 
opportunity it has found and validated.   
The interesting thing about the Customer Development model is that the process it describes 
represents the best practices of winning startups. Describe this model to entrepreneurs who have 
taken their companies all the way to a public offe ring and beyond, and you’ll get heads nodding in 
recognition. It’s just that until now, no one has ever explicitly mapped their journey to success. Even 
more surprising, while the Cu stomer Development model may sound like a new idea for 
entrepreneurs, it shares many features with a U.S. war fighting strategy known as the "OODA Loop" 
articulated by John Boyd
1 and adopted by the U.S. armed forces in the second Gulf War. (You’ll hear 
more about the OODA Loop later in this chapter.)  
The next four chapters provide a close-up look at each of the four steps in the model. The 
following overview will get you oriented to the process as a whole.  
 
 
                                                 
  
1
P Air War College, John R. Boyd, “Patterns of Conflict” and “A Discourse on Winning and Losing”  
 
 
18 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   Step 1: Customer Discovery 
The goal of Customer Discovery is just what the name implies: finding out who the customers for 
your product are and whether the problem you beli eve you are solving is important to them. More 
formally, this step involves discovering whether the problem, product and customer hypotheses in 
your business plan are correct. To do this, you n eed to leave guesswork behind and get “outside the 
building” in order to learn what the high-value cust omer problems are, what it is about your product 
that solves these problems, and who specifically ar e your customer and user (for example, who has 
the power to make or influence the buying decision and who actually will end up using the product 
on a daily basis.) What you find out will also help you shape ho w you will describe your unique 
differences to potential customers. An important insight is that the goal of Customer Development is 
not to collect feature lists  from prospective customers, nor is it to run lots of focus groups . In a 
startup, it is the founders and product developmen t that defines the first product. The job of the 
Customer Development team is to see whether there are customers and a market for that vision.  
(Read this last sentence again.  It’s not intuitively obvious, but the initial product specification comes 
from the founders vision, not the sum of a set of focus groups.) 
The basic premise of Furniture.com and Living.com was a good one. Furniture shopping is time-
consuming, and the selection at many stores can be overwhelming. On top of that, the wait for 
purchased items can seem interminable. While these online retailers had product development 
milestones they lacked formal Customer Development milestones. At Furniture.com the focus was on 
getting to market first and fast. Furniture.com spent $7 million building its web site, e-commerce 
and supply chain systems before the company knew  what customer demand would be. Once the web 
site was up and the supply chain was in place, it began shipping. Even when it found that shipping 
and marketing costs were higher than planned, and that the brand-name manufacturers did not 
want to alienate their traditional retail outlet s, the company pressed fo rward with its existing 
business plan. 
In contrast, at Design Within Reach Rob Forbes was the consummate proponent of a customer-
centric view. Rob was talking to customers and supp liers continually. He didn’t spend time in his 
office pontificating about a vision for his business. Nor di d he go out and start telling customers what 
products he was going to deliver (the natural instinct  of any entrepreneur at this stage). Instead, he 
was out in the field listening, discovering how his customers worked and what their key problems 
were. Rob believed that each new version of the Design Within Reach furniture catalog was a way for 
his company to learn from customers. As each subsequent catalog was developed, feedback from 
customers was combined with the sa les results of the last catalog and the appropriate changes were 
made. Entire staff meetings were devoted to “lesso ns learned” and “what didn’t work.” Consequently, 
as each new catalog hit the street the size of the average customer order increased, along with the 
number of new customers.  
 
 
Step 2: Customer Validation 
Customer Validation is where the rubber meets the road. The goal of this step is to build a 
repeatable sales road map for the sales and marketing teams that will follow later. The sales road 
map is the playbook of the proven and repeatable sales process that has been field-tested by 
successfully selling the product to early customers. Customer Validation proves that you have found 
a set of customers and a market who react positively to the product: By relieving those customers of 
some of their money. A customer purchase in this step validates lots of po lite words from potential 
customers about your product.  
In essence, Customer Discovery and Customer Validation corroborate your business model. 
Completing these first two steps verifies your market, locates your customers, tests the perceived 
value of your product, identifies the economic bu yer, establishes your pricing and channel strategy, 
and checks out your sales cycle and process. If, and only if, you find a group of repeatable customers 
with a repeatable sales process, and then find that  those customers yield a profitable business model, 
do you move to the next step (s caling up and crossing the Chasm. 
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany   | 19 Design Within Reach started with a hypothesis th at its customers fit a narrow profile of design 
professionals. It treated this idea like the educated guess it was, and tested this premise by 
analyzing the sales results of each  catalog. It kept refining its assumptions until it had found a 
repeatable and scalable sales and customer model. 
This is where the dot.com furniture vendors should have stopped and regrouped. When 
customers did not respond as their business models predicted, further execution on the same failed 
plan guaranteed disaster. 
  
Step 3: Customer Creation 
Customer Creation builds on the success the company ha s had in its initial sales. Its goal is to create 
end-user demand and drive that demand into the co mpany’s sales channel. This step is placed after 
Customer Validation to move heavy marketing spending after  the point where a startup acquires its 
first customers, thus allowing the company to control its cash burn rate and protect its most precious 
asset.  
The process of Customer Creation varies with the type of startup. As I noted in Chapter 1, 
startups are not all alike. Some startups are en tering existing markets well defined by their 
competitors, some are creating new markets where no product or company exists, and some are 
attempting a hybrid of the first two, resegmenting ex isting market either as a low-cost entrant or by 
creating a new niche. Each of these Market Type strategies requires a very different set of Customer 
Creation activities. 
In Furniture.com’s prospectus, the first bullet under growth strategy was “Establish a powerful 
brand.” Furniture.com launched a $20 million adverti sing campaign that included television, radio 
and online ads. It spent a total of $34 million on  marketing and advertising, even though revenue 
was just $10.9 million. (Another online furniture startup, Living.com, agreed to pay electronic-
commerce giant Amazon.com $145 million over four ye ars to be featured on Amazon's home page.) 
Brand building and heavy advertising make lots of sense in existing markets when customers 
understand your product or service. However, in an entirely new market this type of “onslaught” 
product launch is like throwing money down the to ilet. Customers don’t have a clue what you are 
talking about, and you don’t have a clue  if they will behave as you assume. 
 
Step 4: Company Building 
Company Building is where the company transitions from its informal, learning and discovery-
oriented Customer Development team into formal departments with VPs of Sales, Marketing and 
Business Development. These executives now focus on building mission-oriented departments that 
can exploit the company’ s early market success. 
In contrast to this incremental process, premat ure scaling is the bane of startups. By the time 
Furniture.com had reached $10 million in sales, it had 209 employees and a burn rate that would 
prove to be catastrophic if any one of the business plan assumptions were incorrect. The approach 
seemed to be to “spend as much as possible on customer acquisition before the music stops.” 
Delivering heavy furniture from multiple manufacturers resulted in unhappy customers as items got 
damaged, lost, or delayed. Flush with investors’ cash, the company responded the way dot-coms tend 
to respond to problems: by spending money. It reordered, and duplicates began piling up in 
warehouses. The company was burning through inve stor dollars like cheap kindling. Furniture.com 
went from filing for a public offering in January to pulling its IPO in June 2000 and talking with 
bankruptcy lawyers. The company was eventually abl e to raise $27 million in venture funding, but 
at a lower valuation than it had gotten the last  t i m e  i t  r a i s e d  m o n e y .  I n  a  b i d  f o r  s u r v i v a l ,  
Furniture.com furiously slashed co sts. The company, which had been  offering free shipping for 
delivery and returns, began charging a $95 delivery ch arge. Then it laid off 41% of its staff. But it 
never answered the key question: Is there a way to sell commodity furniture over the Web and ship 
it cost-effectively when you don't ha ve a nationwide network of stores?  
At Design Within Reach, Rob Forbes ran the co mpany on a shoestring. The burn rate was kept 
low, first as a necessity as he scraped together  financing from friends, family, and the casual 
investor, and then by plan as his team was fi nding a sales road map that could scale. Rob was 
finding a way to sell furniture without a network of stores - it was called a catalog. 
 
 
20 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany    
THE FOUR TYPES OF STARTUP MARKETS  
Since time immemorial a post mortem of a fail ed company usually includes, “I don’t understand 
what happened. We did everything that worked in our last startup.”  The failure isn’t due to lack of 
energy, effort or passion.  It may simply be due to not understanding that there are four types of 
startups , and each of them have a very different set of requirements to succeed:  
• Startups that are entering an existing market  
• Startups that are creating an entirely new market 
• Startups that want to resegment an existing market as a low cost entrant 
• Startups that want to resegment an existing market as a niche player 
  (“Disruptive” and “sustaining” innovations, eloquently described by Clayton Christensen, are 
another way to describe new and existing Market Types.) 
As I pointed out in Chapter 1, thinking and acting  as if all startups are the same is a strategic 
error. It is a fallacy to believe that the strategy and tactics that worked for one startup should be 
appropriate in another.  That’s because Market Type changes everything a company does.   
As an example, imagine it’s October 1999 and yo u are Donna Dubinsky the CEO of a feisty new 
startup, Handspring, in the billion dollar Pe rsonal Digital Assistant (PDA) market.  Other 
companies in the 1999 PDA market were Palm, the or iginal innovator, as well Microsoft and Hewlett 
Packard.  In October 1999 Donna told her VP of Sales, “In the next 12 months I want Handspring to 
win 20% of the Personal Digital Assistant market.”  The VP of Sales swallowed hard and turned to 
the VP of Marketing and said, “I need you to take end user demand away from our competitors and 
drive it into our sales channel.”  The VP of Marketing looked at all the other PDA’s on the market 
and differentiated Handspring’s product by em phasizing expandability and performance.  End 
result?  After twelve months Ha ndsprings revenue was $170 million.   This was possible because in 
1999 Donna and Handspring were in an existing market .  Handspring’s custom ers understood what a 
Personal Digital Assistan t was.  Handspring did not have to educate them about the market, just 
why their new product was better than the competition – and they did it brilliantly. 
What makes this example really interesting is th is: rewind the story 3 years earlier to 1996.  
Before Handspring, Donna and her team had found ed Palm Computing, the pioneer in Personal 
Digital Assistants.  Before Palm arrived on the sc ene the Personal Digital Assistant market did not 
exist.  (A few failed science experiments like Apple’s Newton had come and gone.)  But imagine if 
Donna had turned to her VP of Sales at Palm in 1996 and said, “I want to get 20% of the Personal 
Digital Assistant market by the end of our first year.”   Her VP of Sales might had turned to the VP of 
Marketing and said, “I want you to drive end user demand from our competitors into our sales 
channel.” The VP of Marketing might have said, “Let’s tell everyone about how fast the Palm 
Personal Digital Assistant is.”  If they had done this  there would have been zero dollars in sales.  In 
1996 no potential customer had even heard of a Pe rsonal Digital Assistant.  No one knew what a 
PDA could do, there was no latent demand from en d users, and emphasizing its technical features 
would have been irrelevant.   What Palm needed to do was educate potential customers about what a 
PDA could do for them. By our definition, (a product that allows users to do something they couldn’t 
do before) Palm in 1996 created a new market .  In contrast, Handspri ng in 1999 was in an existing 
market .   
The lesson is that even with essentially identical products and team, Handspring would have 
failed if it had used the same sales and marketing strategy previously used successfully at Palm.  
And the converse is true;  Palm would have failed, burning through all their cash, using 
Handspring’s strategy.  Mark et Type changes everything. 
Market Type changes how you evaluate customer needs, customer adoption rate, how the 
customer understands his needs and how you would position the product to the customer.   Market 
Type also changes the market size, as well as ho w you launch the product into the market.  Table 2.1 
points out what’s different. 
 
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany   | 21 Customers Market Sales Finance 
Needs Market Size Distribution channel On going capital 
Adoption Rate Cost of entry Margins Time to profitability 
Problem recognition Launch Type Sales cycle  
Positioning Competitive Barriers   
 
Table 2.1  Market Type Affects Everything 
Before any sales or marketing activities can be gin, a company must keep testing and asking, 
“What kind of a startup are we?” To see why,  consider the four possible “Market Types.” 
 
A New Product in an Existing Market  
An existing market is pretty easy to understand.  We say you are in an existing market  if your 
product offers higher performance than what is currently offered.  Higher performance can be a 
product or service that runs faster, does somethin g better or substantially improves on what is 
already on the market.  The good news is that the users and the market are known, but so are the 
competitors. In fact, the competitors define the market. The basis of competition is therefore all 
about the product and product features.  
You can enter an existing market with a cheaper or repositioned “niche” product, but if that is 
the case we call that a resegmented market. 
 
A New Product in a New Market  
Another possibility is to introduce a new product into a new market. What’s a new market? It’s what 
happens when a company creates a large customer base who couldn’t do something before because of 
true innovation creating something never existed be fore, or dramatically lower cost that creates a 
new class of users.  Or the new product solves availability, skill, convenience, or location issues in a 
way no other product has.  Compaq’s first portable computers allowed business executives to take 
their computers with them, something simply impo ssible previously.  Compaq created a new market, 
the portable computer market. With Quicken, Intuit offered people a way to manage their finances 
on their personal computers, automating check writ ing, maintaining a check register and reconciling 
monthly balances; things that most people hated to  do and few could do well.  In doing so, Intuit 
created the home accounting market. (By “created the market” I do not mean “first-to-market;” I 
mean the company whose market share and ubiquity are associated with the market.) 
In a new market the good news is that your prod uct features are at first irrelevant because there 
are no competitors (except other pesky startups). The bad news is that the users and the market are 
undefined and unknown. If you’re creating a new ma rket, your problem isn’t how to compete with 
other companies on product features but how to convince a set of customers that your vision is not a 
hallucination.  Creating a new market requires understanding whether there is a large customer 
base who couldn’t do this before, whether these customers can be convinced that they want or need 
your new product, and whether customer adoption occurs in your lifetime.  It also requires rather 
sophisticated thinking about fina ncing – how you manage the cash burn rate during the adoption 
phase, and how you manage and find invest ors who are patient and have deep pockets 
 
A New Product Attempting to Resegment an Existing Market: Low Cost 
Over half of startups pursue the hybrid course  of attempting to introduce a new product that 
resegments an existing market . Resegmenting an existing market can take two forms: a low-cost 
strategy or a niche strategy. (By the way, segmentation is not the same as differentiation. 
Segmentation means that you’ve picked a clear and di stinct spot in customers’  minds that is unique, 
understandable, and, most important, concerns something they value and want and need now.) 
 
 
22 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany     Low-cost resegmentation  is just what it sounds like – are there customers at the low-end of an 
existing marketing who will buy “good enough” performance if they could get it at a substantially 
lower price?  If you truly can be a low cost (and profitable) provider, entering existing markets at this end is fun, as incumbent companies tend to ab andon low-margin businesses and head up-market. 
 
A New Product Attempti ng to Resegment an Existing Market: Niche 
Niche resegmentation  is slightly different.  It looks at an existing market and asks, “Would some part 
of this market buy a new product designed to address their specific needs?  Even if it cost more?  Or 
worse performance in an aspect of the product irrelevant to this niche.  Niche resegmentation  
attempts to convince customers that some characte ristic of the new product is radical enough to 
change the rules and shape of an existing market.  Unlike low-cost resegmentation, niche goes after 
the core of an existing market’s profitable business. 
Both cases of resegmenting a market reframe how people think about the products within an 
existing market. In-n-Out Burger is a classic case of resegmenting an existing market. Who would 
have thought that a new fast food chain (now with 200 company owned stores) could be a successful 
entrant after McDonalds and Burger King owned the market? Yet In-n-Out succeeded by simply 
observing that the incumbent players had strayed from their original concept of a hamburger chain. 
By 2001 McDonald’s had over 55 menu items and not on e of them tasted particularly great. In stark 
contrast, In-n-Out offered three items: all fresh, high quality and great tasting. They focused on the 
core fast food segment that  wanted high quality hamburgers and nothing else.  
While resegmenting an existing market is the most common Market Type choice of new startups, 
it’s also the trickiest.  As a low-end resegmentation strategy, it needs a long-term product plan that 
uses low cost as market entry to eventual pr ofitability and up-market growth.  As a niche 
resegmentation, this strategy faces entrenched competitors who will fiercely defend their profitable 
markets.  And both require adroit and agile positi oning of how the new product redefines the market. 
 
Market Type and the Customer Development Process 
As a company follows the Customer Development process the importance of Market Type grows in 
each step.  During the first step, Customer Discovery, all startups, regardless of Market Type, leave 
the building and talk to customers.  In Customer Validation, the differences between type of startup 
emerge as sales and positioning strategies diverge rapidly.  By Customer Creation, the third step, 
the difference between startup Market Types is acute as customer acquisition and sales strategy 
differ dramatically between the types of markets.  It is in Customer Creation that startups who do 
not understand Market Type spend themselves out of business.  Chapter 5, Customer Creation, 
highlights these potential landmines. 
The speed with which a company moves through the Customer Development process also 
depends on Market Type.  Even if you quit your ol d job on Friday and on Monday joined a startup in 
an existing market producing the same but better product, you still need to answer these questions. 
This process ought to be a snap, and can be ac complished in a matter of weeks or months.   
In contrast, a company creating a new market has an open-ended set of questions.  Completing 
the Customer Development processes may take a year or two or even longer. 
Table 2.2 sums up the differences between the four Market Types. As you’ll see, the Customer 
Development model provides an explicit methodology for answering the question “What kind of 
startup are we?” It’s a question you’ll keep coming back to in each of the four steps. 
 
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany   | 23  Existing Market Resegmented Markets New  Market 
Customers Existing Existing New/New usage 
Customer 
Needs Performance 1. Cost 
2. Perceived need Simplicity & convenience 
Performance Better/faster 1. Good enough at the low end 
2. Good enough for new niche Low in “traditional attributes”, 
improved by new customer 
metrics 
Competition Existing 
Incumbents Existing incumbents Non-consumption /other 
startups 
Risks Existing 
Incumbents 1. Existing incumbents 
2. Niche strategy fails Market adoption 
Table 2.2  Market Type Characteristics 
SYNCHRONIZING PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND CUSTOMER DEVELOPMENT  
As I suggested in Chapter 1, Customer Development is  not a substitute for the activities occurring in 
the Product Development group. Instead, Customer Development and Product Development are 
parallel processes. While the Customer Development group is engaged in customer-centric activities 
outside the building, the Product Development group is focused on the product-centric activities that 
are taking place internally. At first glance, it mi ght seem that there isn’t much connection between 
the two. This is a mistake. For a startup to succeed, Product and Customer Development must 
remain synchronized and operate in concert.  
However, the ways the two groups interact in a startup are 180 degrees from how they would 
interact in a large company. Engineering’s job in large companies is to make  follow-on products for 
an existing market. A follow-on product starts with several things already known: who the customers 
are, what they need, what markets they are in, and who the company’s competitors are. (All the 
benefits of being in an existing market plus having customers and revenue.) The interaction in a 
large company between Product Development and Customer Development is geared to delivering 
additional features and functions to existing cust omers at a price that maximizes market share and 
profitability. 
In contrast, most startups can only guess who their customers are and what markets they are in. 
The only certainty on day one is what the product vision is. It follows, then, that the goal of 
Customer Development in a startup is to find a ma rket for the product as spec’d, not to develop or 
refine a spec based on a market that is unknown. This is a fundamental di fference between a big 
company and most startups. 
To put the point another way, big companies tailor their Product Development to known 
customers. Product features emerge by successive refinement against known customer and market 
requirements and a known competitive environment. As the product features get locked down, how 
well the product will do with those customers and markets becomes clearer. Startups, however, begin 
with a known product spec and tailor their Pr oduct Development to unknown customers. Product 
features emerge by vision and fiat against unk nown customer and market requirements. As the 
market and customers get clearer by successive refi nement, product features are driven by how well 
they satisfy this market. In short, in big companie s, the product spec is market-driven; in startups, 
the marketing is product-driven.  
In both cases, Product and Customer Development must go hand in hand, in most startups the 
only formal synchronization between Engineering and the sales/marketing teams are when they line 
up for contentious battles. Engineering says, “How could you have promised these features to 
customers? We’re not building that.” Sales responds, “How come the product is missing all the 
features you promised would be in this release? We need to commit these other features to get an 
order.” One of the goals of a formal Customer Development process is to ensure that the focus on the 
product and the focus on the customer remain in concert without rancor and with a modicum of 
surprise.  
A few examples of synchronization points are: 
 
 
24 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   • In each of the steps—Customer Discovery, Customer Validation, Customer Creation and 
Company Building—the Product Development and Customer Development teams meet in a 
series of formal “synchronization” meetings. Unless the two groups agree, Customer 
Development does not move forward to the next step.  
• In Customer Discovery, the Customer Development team strives to validate the product spec, 
not come up with a new set of features. TP   
PTIf customers do not agree that there’s a problem to 
be solved, or think that the problem is not painful, or don’t deem the product spec solves 
their problem, only then do the customer and Product Development teams reconvene to add 
or refine features. 
• Also in Customer Discovery, when customers have consistently said that new or modified 
product features are required, the VP of Product Development goes out with the team to 
listen to customer feedback before new features are added. 
• In Customer Validation, key members of the Product Development team go out in front of 
customers as part of the pre-sales support team. 
• In Company Building, the Product Development team does installations and support for 
initial product while training the support and service staff. 
As you proceed through the detailed phases of each step in the chapters to come, you’ll see that 
this emphasis on synchronization runs through the entire Customer Development process. 
 
SUMMARY : THE CUSTOMER DEVELOPMENT PROCESS  
The Customer Development model consists of four well-defined steps: Customer Development, Customer Validation, Customer Creation, and Company Building. As you will see in succeeding 
chapters, each of these steps has a set of clear, concise deliverables that give the company and its 
investors incontrovertible proof that progress is being made on the customer front. Moreover, the 
first three steps of Customer Development can be accomplished with a staff that can fit in a phone 
booth.  
While each step has its own specific objectives, the process as a whole has one overarching goal: 
proving that there is a profitable , scalable business for the company. This is what turns the company 
from a nonprofit into a moneymaking endeavor. 
Being a great entrepreneur means finding the path through the fog and confusion and myriad of 
choices. To do that, you need not only vision but a process. This book gives you the process. Its 
premise is simple: if you execute the four steps of Customer Development rigorously and thoroughly, 
you increase the odds of achieving succ ess, and you can reach the epiphany. 
 
 
Chapter 2: The Path  to Epiphany   | 25 
 
Chapter 3: Customer Discovery  |    26Test “Problem” Hypothesis Demand  
Creation 
Hypothesis  Market Type
Hypothesis  Product  
Hypothesis  Customer & 
Problem 
Hypothesis  Distribution & 
Pricing 
Hypothesis Competitive 
Hypothesis  State Your H ypotheses 
Market 
KnowledgeFriendly 
First Contacts   “Problem” 
Presentation  Customer 
Understanding
 Second
Reality Check  First Reality  
Check  “Product”
PresentationYet More 
Customer 
Visits  Test “Product” Hypothesis 
Iterate or 
Exit Verify the  
Problem   Verify the 
Product  Verify the
Business 
Model  Verify Customer Discovery Step-by-Step
1st Advisory 
Board 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3: Customer Discovery  | 27  
 
  
 
Chapter 3 
Customer Discovery 
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. 
— Lao-tzu 
In 1994, Steve Powell had an idea for a new type of  home office device. Capitalizing on the new high-
speed phone connection called ISDN, Steve envisioned creating the Swiss Army knife of home office 
devices. His box would offer fax, voicemail, intell igent call forwarding, email, video and phone all 
rolled into one. Initially Steve envisioned that the market for his device would be the 11 million 
people with small offices or home offices (the SOHO market). 
Steve’s technical vision was compelling, and he ra ised $3 million in his first round of funding for 
his company, FastOffice. Li ke most technology startups, FastOffi ce was first headed by its creator, 
even though Steve was an engineer by training. A year after he got his first round of funding, he 
raised another $5 million at a higher valuation. In good Silicon Valley tradition, his team followed 
the canonical product development diagram, and in eighteen months he had first customer ship of 
his product called Front Desk. There was just one sm all problem. Front Desk cost $1395, and at that 
price, customers were not exactly lining up at Fast Office’s door. Steve’s board had assumed that like 
all technology startups, first customer ship meant FastOffice was going to ramp up sales revenues 
the day the product was available.  Six months after first customer ship, the company had missed its 
revenue plan and the investors were unhappy. 
It was at about this time that I met Steve and his management team. His venture firm asked me 
to come by and help Steve with his “positioning.” (Today when I hear that request I realize it’s code 
for “The product is shipping, but we’re not selling any. Got any ideas?”) When I got a demo of Front 
Desk, my reaction was, “Wow, that’s really an innovative device. I’d love to have one at home. How 
much is it?” When Steve told me it was $1400, my re sponse was, “Gosh, I wouldn’t buy one, but can I 
be a beta site?” I still remember Steve’s heated reply: “That’s the reaction everyone has. What’s 
wrong? Why wouldn’t you buy one?” The stark realit y was that FastOffice had built a Rolls Royce for 
people with Volkswagen budgets. Few—unfortunate ly, very few—small home businesses could afford 
it.  
Steve and his team made one of the standard startup mistakes. They had developed a great 
product, but they had neglected to spend an equi valent amount of time developing the market.  The Company 
Building  Customer 
Discovery Customer 
Validation  Customer 
Creation  

 
 
 
28 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   home office market simply had no  compelling need that made Front Desk a “must have,” especially 
at a high price. FastOffice had a solution in search of a problem. 
When Steve and his team realized that individuals were simply not going to shell out $1400 for a 
“nice to have peripheral,” they needed a new stra tegy. Like all startups faced with this problem, 
FastOffice fired its VP of Sales and came up with a new sales and marketing strategy. Now, instead 
of selling to individuals who worked at home, th e company would sell to Fortune 1000 corporations 
who had a “distributed workforce”—salespeople who had offices at home. The rationale was that a 
VP of Sales of a large corporation could justif y spending $1400 on a high-value employee. The 
thought was that the “new” product, now rename d HomeDesk, could make a single salesperson 
appear like a large corporate office.  
While the new strategy sounded great on paper, it suffered from the same problem as the first: 
the product might be nice to have, but there wa s no compelling problem it was solving. Vice 
presidents of sales at major corporations were not going to bed at night worrying about their remote 
offices. They were worrying about how to make their sales numbers.  
What ensued was the startup version of the ritualized Japanese Noh play I mentioned in 
Chapter 1. Faced with the failure of Plan B, FastOf fice fired the VP of Marketing and came up with 
yet another new strategy. The company was now on the startup death spiral: the executive staff 
changed with each new strategy. After the third st rategy didn’t work either, Steve was no longer 
CEO and the board brought in an experienced business executive.  
What’s interesting about the FastOffice story is not that it’s unique but that it’s so common. 
Time and again, startups focus on first customer ship, and only after the product is out the door do 
they find out that customers aren’t behaving as expected. By the time the company realizes that 
sales revenues won’t meet expectations, it’s already behind the proverbial eigh t ball. Is this the end 
of the story?  No, we’ll revisit FastOffice after we explain the Customer Discovery philosophy. 
Like most startups, Fast Office knew how to build a product and how to measure progress toward 
the product ship date. What the company lacked was a set of early Customer Development goals that 
would have allowed it to measure its progress in understanding customers and finding a market for 
its product. These goals would have been achieved when FastOffice could answer four questions: 
• Have we identified a problem a customer wants solved? 
• Does our product solve these customer needs? 
• If so, do we have a viable an d profitable business model? 
• Have we learned enough to go out and sell? 
Answering these questions is the purpose of the first step in the Customer Development model, 
Customer Discovery. This chapter explains how to go about it.  
THE CUSTOMER DISCOVERY PHILOSOPHY  
Let me state the purpose of Customer Discovery a little more formally. A startup begins with a 
vision: a vision of a new product or service, a vision of how the product will reach its customers, and 
a vision of why lots of people will buy that produc t. But most of what a startup’s founders initially 
believe about their market and potential customers are just educated guesses. To turn the vision into 
reality (and a profitable company), a startup must test those guesses, or hypotheses, and find out 
which are correct. So the general goal of Customer Discovery amounts to this: turning the founders’ 
initial hypotheses about their market and customers into facts. And since the facts live outside the 
building, the primary activity is to get in front of customers. Only after the founders have performed 
this step will they know whether they have a valid vision or just a hallucination. 
Sounds simple, doesn’t it? Yet for anyone who has worked in established companies, the 
Customer Discovery process is disorienting. All the rules that marketers learn about product 
management in large companies are turned upside down. It’s instructive to enumerate all things you 
are not going to do:  
• understand the needs and wants of all customers  
• make a list of all the features customers want before they buy your product  
• hand Product Development a features list of the sum of all customer requests 
• hand Product Development a detailed marketing requirements document 
 
 
Chapter 3: Customer Discovery | 29 • run focus groups and test customers’ reaction s to your product to see if they will buy 
• Instead, you are going to develop your product for the few, not the many. Moreover, you’re 
going to start building your product even be fore you know whether you have any customers 
for it. 
For an experienced marketing or product management executive, these statements are not only 
disorienting and counterintuitive; they are heretical.  Everything I am saying you are not supposed to 
do is what marketing and product management pr ofessionals have been trained to do well. Why 
aren’t the needs of all potential customers important? What is it about a first product from a new 
company that’s different from follow-on products in  a large company? What is it about a startup’s 
first customers that make  the rules so different? 
 
Develop the Product for the Few, Not the Many 
In a traditional product management and marketin g process the goal is to develop a Marketing 
Requirements Document (MRD) for engineering. The MRD contains the sum of all the possible 
customer feature requests, prioritized in a coll aborative effort between Marketing, Sales and 
Engineering. Marketing holds focus groups, analyzes sales data from the field, and looks at customer 
feature requests and complaints.  This information leads to requested features that are added to the 
product specification, and the engineering team builds these features into the next release.  
While this process is rational for an established company entering an existing market, it is folly 
for startups. Why? In established companies, the MRD process ensures that engineering will build a 
product that appeals to an existing market.  But in either case the customers and their needs are 
known. In a startup, the first product is not designed to satisfy a main stream customer. No startup 
can afford the engineering effort or the time to build a product with every feature that a mainstream 
customer needs in its first release. The product would take years to get to market and be obsolete by 
the time it arrives. A successful startup solves th is conundrum by focusing its development and early 
selling efforts on a very small group of early custom ers who have bought into the startup’s vision. It 
is this small group of visionary customers who will give the company the feedback necessary to add 
features into follow-on releases. Enthusiasts for products who spread the good news are often called 
evangelists. But we need a ne w word to describe visionary customers— those who will not only spread 
the good news about unfinished and untested produc ts but also buy them. For that reason I often 
refer to them as earlyvangelists . 2
PT 
 
Earlyvangelists: The Most Import ant Customers You’ll Ever Know  
Earlyvangelists are a special breed of customers will ing to take a risk on yo ur startup’s product or 
service because they can actually envision its potential to solve a critical and immediate problem—
and they have the budget to purchase it.  Unfortunately, most customers don’t fit this profile. Here’s 
an example from the corporate world. 
Imagine a bank with a line around the block on Frid ays as customers wait an  hour or more to get 
in and cash their paychecks. Now imagine you are one of the founders of a software company whose 
product could help the ba nk reduce customers’ waiting time to ten minutes. You go into the bank and 
tell the president, “I have a product that can solve your problem.” If his response is “What problem?” 
you have a customer who does not recognize he has a pressing need you can help him with. There is 
no time in the first two years in the life of a st artup that he will be a customer, and any feedback 
from him about product needs would be useless. Customers like these are the traditional “late 
adopters” because they have a “latent need.”  
Another response from the bank president could be “Yes, we have a terrible problem. I feel very 
bad about it, and I hand out cups of water to our customers waiting in line on the hottest days of the 
year.” In this case, the bank president is one of those customers who recognize they have a problem 
but haven’t been motivated to do anything more than paper over the symptoms. They may provide 
                                                 
  
T2
T There’s a great body of work on the area of “Lead Users” popularized by Eric Von Hippel of MIT.  Also see Enos 
1962, Freeman 1968, Shaw 1985, Lilen & Morrison 2001. 
 
 
 
30 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   useful feedback about the types of problems they’re experiencing, but more than likely they will not 
be first in line to buy a new product. Since they ha ve an “active need,” you can probably sell to these 
customers later, when you can deliver a “mainstream” product, but not today. 
If it’s a good day, you may run into a bank presid ent who says, “Yes, this is a heck of a problem. 
In fact, we’re losing over $500,000 a year in business.  I’ve been looking for a software solution that 
will cut down our check cashing and processing time by 70%. The software has to integrate with our 
bank’s Oracle back end, and it has to cost less than  $150,000. And I need it delivered in six months.” 
Now you’re getting warm; this is a customer who has “visualized the solution.” It would be even 
better if the president said, “I haven’t seen a single software package that solves our problem, so I 
wrote a request for our IT department to develop one. They’ve cobbled together a solution, but it 
keeps crashing on my tellers and my CIO is having fits keeping it running.”  
You’re almost there: you’ve found a customer who has such a desperate problem that he has had 
his own homegrown solution built out of piece parts. 
Finally, imagine that the bank president says, “Boy, if we could ever find a vendor who could 
solve this problem, we could spend the $500,000 I’ve bu dgeted with them.” (Truth be told, no real live 
customer has ever said that. But we can dream, can’ t we?) At this point, you have found the ultimate 
customer for a startup selling to corporate customers. While consumer products usually don’t have as 
many zeros in them, earlyvangelist consumers can be found by tracing out the same hierarchy of 
needs. 
Earlyvangelists can be identified by these customer characteristics (see Figure 3.1): 
• The customer has a problem. 
• The customer understands he or she has a problem. 
• The customer is actively searching for a so lution and has a timetable for finding it.  
• The problem is painful enough that the customer has cobbled together an interim solution. 
• The customer has committed, or can quickly acquire, budget dollars to solve the problem. 
Figure 3.1  Earlyvangelist Characteristics 
You can think of these characteristics as making  up a scale of customer pain. Characterizing 
customers’ pain on this scale is a critical part of Customer Discovery. My contention is that 
earlyvangelist customers will be found only at points 4 and 5: those who have already built a 
homegrown solution (whether in a company by building a software solution, or at home by taping 
together a fork, light bulb and vacuum cleaner) an d have or can acquire a budget. These people are 
perfect candidates to be earlyvangelists. They are the ones you will rely on for feedback and for your 
first sales; the ones who will tell others about your product and spread the word that the vision is 
real. Moreover, when you meet them, you mentally include them on your list of expert customers to 
add to your advisory board (more ab out advisory boards in Chapter 4). 
 55..      HHaass  oorr  CCaann  AAccqquuiirree    
aa  BBuuddggeett  
33..          HHaass  BBeeeenn  AAccttiivveellyy  LLooookkiinngg  
ffoorr  aa  SSoolluuttiioonn  
11..                                                    HHaass  aa  PPrroobblleemm22..                          IIss  AAwwaarree  ooff  HHaavviinngg  aa  PPrroobblleemm  44..            HHaass  PPuutt  TTooggeetthheerr  aa  
SSoolluuttiioonn  oouutt  ooff  PPiieeccee  PPaarrttss  
 
 
Chapter 3: Customer Discovery | 31 Start Development Based on the Vision 
The idea that a startup builds its product for a small group of initial customers, rather than devising 
a generic mainstream spec, is radical. What follows is equally revolutionary. 
On the day the company starts, there is very limited customer input to a product specification. 
The company doesn’t know who its initial customers are (but it may think it knows) or what they 
will want as features. One alternative is to put Product Development on hold until the Customer 
Development team can find those customers. Howe ver, having a product you can demonstrate and 
iterate is helpful in moving the Customer Development process along.  A more productive approach 
is to proceed with Product Development, with the feature list driven by the vision and experience of 
the company’s founders. 
Therefore, the Customer Development model has your founding team take the product as spec’d 
and search to see if there are customers—any customers—who will buy the product exactly as you 
have defined it. When you do find those customers, you tailor the first release of the product so it 
satisfies their needs.  
The shift in thinking is important. For the firs t product in a startup, your initial purpose in 
meeting customers is not to gather feature requests so that you can change the product. Instead, 
your purpose in talking to customers is  to find customers for the product you are already building. 
If and only if, no customers can be found for the product as spec’d do you bring the features 
customers requested to the Product Development team. In the Customer Development model, then, 
feature request is by exception rather than rule . This eliminates the endless list of requests that often 
delay first customer ship and drive your Product Development team crazy. 
If Product Development is simply going to st art building the product without any customer 
feedback, why have anyone talk to customers at a ll? Why don’t you just build the product, ship it, 
and hope someone wants to buy it? The operative word is start  building the product. The job of 
Customer Development is to get the company’s customer knowledge to catch up to the pace of 
Product Development—and in the process, to guarantee that there will be paying customers the day 
the product ships.  An important side benefit is the credibility that the Customer Development team 
accrues internally  within your organization.  Product Deve lopment will be interacting with a team 
that actually understands customer needs and desires.  Product Development no longer will roll 
their eyes after every request for features or ch anges to the product, but instead understand they 
come from a deep understanding of customer needs. 
As the Customer Development team discovers new insights about the needs of this core group of 
initial customers, it can provide valuable feedback to the Product Development group. As you’ll see, 
these Customer Development/Product Development synchronization meetings ensure that once key 
customer information does become available it is integrated into the future development of the 
product. 
To sum up the Customer Discovery philosophy: in sharp contrast to the MRD approach of 
building a product for a wide group of customers, a successful startup’s first re lease is designed to be 
“good enough only for our first paying customers.” The purpose of Customer Discovery is to identify 
those key visionary customers, understand their needs, and verify that your product solves a 
problem that they are willing to pay to have solv ed—or not. Meanwhile, yo u start development based 
on your initial vision, using your visionary customers to test whether that vision has a market. And 
you adjust your vision according to what you find out. 
If FastOffice had understood this philosophy, it could have avoided several false starts. As it 
happens, there was a happy ending (at least for some  later-stage investors), as the company survived 
and lived to play again. The new CEO worked wi th Steve Powell (who became the chief technical 
officer) to understand the true technical assets of the company. The new leadership terminated the 
sales and marketing staff and pared the company back to the core engineering team. What they 
discovered was that their core asset was in the data communications technology that offered voice 
over data communications lines. FastOffice discar ded its products for the home, refocused, and 
became a major supplier of equipment to telecommunications carriers. The Customer Discovery 
process would have gotten the company there a lot sooner. 
 
 
 
 
32 | The Four Steps to the Epiphany   OVERVIEW OF THE CUSTOMER DISCOVERY PROCESS  
I’ve already touched on some of the elements of the philosophy behind this first step in the Customer 
Development model. Here’s a quick overview of the entire process as it is developed in Part Two. 
As with all the steps in Customer Development, I divide Customer Discovery into phases. Unlike 
subsequent steps, Customer Develo pment has a “phase 0,” before you can even get started, you need 
buy-in from your board and your executive staff. After that, Customer Discovery has four phases (see 
Figure 3.2).  
 
 
Figure 3.2  Customer Discovery: Overview of the Process 
Phase 1 is a rigorous process of writing a series of  briefs that capture the hypotheses embodied in 
your company’s vision. These hypotheses are th e assumptions about your product, customers, 
pricing, demand, market, and competition that you will test in the remainder of this step. 
In phase 2 you qualify those assumptions by testing them in front of potential customers. At this 
point you want to do very little talking and a lo t of listening. Your goal is to understand your 
customers and their problems, and while doing so get a deep understanding of their business, their 
workflow, their organization, and their product needs. You then return to your company, integrate 
all you learned, update Engineering with customer  feedback, and jointly revise your product and 
customer briefs.  
In phase 3 you take your revised product concept and test its features in front of customers. The 
goal is not to sell the product but to validate the phase 1 hypotheses by having customers say, “Yes, 
these features solve our problems.” 
At the same time that you’ve been testing the pr oduct features, you’ve been also testing a bigger 
idea: the validity of your entire business model. A valid business model consists of customers who 
place a high value on your solution, as well as fi nding that the solution you offer is, (for a company,) 
a mission-critical solution, or (for a consumer,) a “have-to-have” product. In front of potential buyers, 
you test your pricing, your channel strategy, your sales process and sales cycle, and discover who is 
the economic buyer (the one with a budget).  This is equally true for consumer products where a sale 
to a teenager might mean the economic buyer is the parent while the user is the child. 
Finally, in phase 4 you stop and verify that you understand customers’ problems, that the 
product solves those problems, that customers will pay for the product, and that the resulting 
revenue will result in a profitable business model. This phase culminates in the deliverables for the 
Customer Discovery step: a problem statement document, an expanded product requirement 
document, an updated sales and revenue plan, an d a sound business and product plan. With your 
product features and business model validated, you decide whether you have learned enough to go 
out and try to sell a select your product to a few visionary customers or whether you need to go back 
Customer  
Discovery Market 
Validatio
Phase 1 
State  
Hypotheses Phase 2 
Test Problem 
Hypotheses  Phase 4 
Verify Phase 3 
Test Product 
Concept  
Validation 
 
 
Chapter 3: Customer Discovery | 33 to customers to learn some  more. If, and only if, you are successf ul in this step do you proceed to 
Customer Validation. 
That’s Customer Discovery in a nutshell. The re mainder of this chapter details each of the 
phases I have just described. The summary chart at the end of the chapter captures this step in 
detail along with the deliverables that will tell yo u whether you’ve succeede d. But before you move 
into the details of each phase, you need to understand who is going to be doing the work of Customer 
Development. Who comprises the Customer Development team? 
 
The Customer Development Team 
The Customer Development process gives up traditional titles and replaces them with ones that are 
more functional. As a startup moves through the first two steps of the process, it has no Sales, 
Marketing, or Business Development organizations or VPs. Instead, it relies on an entrepreneurial 
Customer Development team (see Appendix A for the rationale for the Customer Development team 
concept. 
At first, this “team” may consist of the company’s technical founder who moves out to talk with 
customers while five engineers write code (or build ha rdware, or design a new coffee cup, etc.). More 
often than not it includes a “head of Customer Development” who has a product marketing or 
product management background and is comfortabl e moving back and forth between customer and 
Product Development conversations. Later, as the startup moves into the Customer Validation step, 
the Customer Development team may grow to several people including a dedicated “sales closer” 
responsible for the logistics of getting early orders signed. 
But whether it is a single individual or a team , Customer Development must have the authority 
to radically change the company’s direction, produc t or mission and the creative, flexible mindset of 
an entrepreneur. To succeed in th is process, they must possess:  
• The ability to listen to customer objections and understand whether they are issues about 
the product, the presentation, the pricing, or something else (or the wrong type of customer.)  
• Experience in moving between the customer to Product Development team  
• The ability to embrace constant change.  
• The capacity to put themselves in their customers’ shoes and understand how they work and 
what problems they have. 
Complementing the Customer Development team is a startup’s product execution team. While 
Customer Development is out of the building talking with customers, the product team is focused on 
creating the actual product. Often this team is  headed by the product visionary who leads the 
development effort. As you will see, regular communication between Customer Development and 
product execution is a critical requirement.  
