?
$
$
$
$
@+
%
%
!<>
<>
TOP 10 Mistak es Companies M ake 
When Conduc ting Business Rules Projec ts
by Gladys S.W . Lam
Courtesy of BRCommunity.com Business Rule Solutions, LLC
<>
<>
?
$
$
$
$
$
$
+
<>
<>

1
Contents
Forward  
Mistake 1:    Treating Business Rules Initiatives Simply as IT Projects  1
Mistake 2:    Not Focusing on Terminology  3
Mistake 3:    Assume Everyone Knows What a Business Rule Is  5
Mistake 4:    Not Managing Business Rules from the Start   7
Mistake 5:    Not Having the Right Business Infrastructure   9
Mistake 6:    Not Having Strong Sponsorship  11
Mistake 7:   Not Having a Well-Defined Scope  13
Mistake 8:   Not Having the Right Skill Set  15
Mistake 9:    Not Having a Business Rule Methodology  17
Mistake 10:  Not Communicating  19
Business Rule Initiative Checklist   21
A Bit of History  ...   22
 Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top

Forward
Mistakes happen. It’s a fact of life. However, we must realize that beyond these mistakes, what really matters is what we learn from 
them. We can then be armed with this newfound knowledge and be able to improve our practices going forward.
As Principal and Co-Founder of Business Rule Solutions, a company that focuses exclusively on business rules and business decision 
management, I am fortunate to have the opportunity to work with a variety of organizations internationally from small businesses to 
Fortune 500 companies on business rule projects.  As moderator of the ever-popular “Business Rules Forum Practitioners’ Panel: The 
DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules,”  I am also able to ascertain from companies such as Bank of America, Blue Cross Blue Shield, 
Delta Dental, and many more their insights and experiences.  As the Executive Director of the Business Rules Forum (BRF) conference, 
which has now expanded into Building Business Capability (BBC) conference, I, together with Ron Ross, have realized the vision of 
making business rules a centerpiece in building complete business solutions.
These Top 10 Mistakes started off as a presentation in the 2010 BBC/BRF conference. To my surprise, the conference room was 
packed. I had attendees practically sitting on my toes. In fact, the session was so well received that I was asked to present again in the 
afternoon. Given the apparent demand for this topic, I decided to write a short article on each mistake and publish it on BRCommunity.
com.  The final article was published shortly after the 2011 conference.  I will not be giving this presentation again in the 2014 conference; 
however, I will let these writings speak for me.
In these pieces you will learn not only about the Top 10 Mistakes, but you will also gain practical experience about how to avoid them.  
Along with my words, you will hear voices from practitioners sharing their state-of-the-art advice.
Reading these pieces you will hear about some of the key topics in business rules and decision management, including:
Why – Why business rules projects? Why would sponsors support business rules projects? See Mistake 1: Treating Business Rules 
Initiatives Simply as IT Projects and Mistake 6:  Not Having Strong Sponsorship . 
What – Defining what a business rule is.  See Mistake 3: Assume Everyone Knows What a Business Rule Is.
How – Methodologies and techniques. See Mistake 9: Not Having a Business Rule Methodology, Mistake 2:  Not Focusing on 
Terminology, and Mistake 4:  Not Managing Business Rules from the Start .
Who – Players and skill sets. See Mistake  8: Not Having the Right Skill Set, Mistake 5:  Not Having the Right Business Infrastructure, 
and Mistake 10:  Not Communicating .
Many of you might be under the impression that in business rules projects, we capture one business rule at a time.  That’s far from 
the case.  Among other areas, our business rule projects support analysis of process activities, operational decisions, and contractual 
agreements.  Business rules are captured, analyzed and managed in sets in order to guide behavior or to make decisions. See Mistake 
7: Not Having a Well-Defined Scope .
These 10 Mistakes were written to be short, light and easy-to-read.  They include many references for more in-depth reading should 
you wish to pursue any topic further.  Much of the thinking, concepts and techniques described here are based on two books: Business 
Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of Knowledge (4th ed.)  by Ronald G. Ross, and Building Business Solutions,  co-authored by Ron 
and me.
Last but not least when you get to the end of the 10 Mistakes, there is a small surprise that is very personal to me.
Enjoy the read!
Gladys
1Mistake1 Treating Business Rules Initiatives Simply as IT Projects
Everyone who has a teenager must have gone through the cell 
phone selection process. 
My daughter approached me recently and said, “Mommmyy (I 
know I am in trouble), I need a new cell phone.” Given that she 
will be driving on her own and going away to college soon, I 
thought that a new cell phone was reasonable. It will give her an 
easily accessible way to contact me. 
As it turns out (and no one will be surprised by this), she picked 
a very expensive cell phone. I asked her why she had to have 
THAT particular phone; this is what she said ...
• I can text without looking (which only means that she will text 
under the dinner table while she is supposed to be talking to 
me). 
• I can get on Facebook (when I requested to be her Facebook 
friend, she rejected me). 
• I can search anything on the web really fast (does she need 
to search for her mother on the web?). 
• It comes in pink (and I care … why!? ). 
I asked, “What about my requirements? I want to get you a cell 
phone because I want to stay in contact with you.”
I travel a lot so I use email a lot. “Does the cell phone download 
email, and can you reply quickly?” (She doesn’t know … or care . 
Did you know that email is already passé?)
“Can I leave a voice mail for you?” (Her response: “What’s voice 
mail?”)
“How about that GPS thing so I can see where you are at any 
time?” (I thought I would get a reaction on that one. Bingo!  She 
rolled her eyes, turned around, and walked out of the room.)
Since I am paying for this cell phone, I want to make sure my 
(business) requirements are met.
When your organization decides to adapt a business rule 
approach, be aware that the ultimate benefit must be on the 
business side. IT will very quickly discover that there is a whole range of excellent rule engine tools that allow developers to 
quickly code, test and deploy rules. 
However, the true value of the business rule approach lies with 
the business. The following are three very common business 
drivers for business rules:
• The business taking full control of its own rules. 
• The business knowing and managing its own rules.
• The business having better guidance and making better 
decisions. 
1. The business taking full control of its own rules.
The true value of a business rule approach is the business 
having the ability to take full control of its own rules. This 
means the business being able to change and deploy rules 
with considerably reduced support from IT. Mukundan Agaram, 
Enterprise Architect at Delta Dental of Michigan, said it best:
“Make sure you are realizing all the important features that 
are necessary to fully realize the value-add of business rules 
as a business  proposition. For example, at Delta Dental, 
we put the business rules entirely in the hands of business 
people, which meant that they author the rules, they test the 
rules, they regression test the rules, they analyze the rules, 
they deploy the rules … so we get to have a vacation.”[1] 
The business can take changes from business policies, 
agreements, and operations to system implementation. In 
today’s fast changing world, we recognize that rules change a 
lot faster than implementation cycles. With the right method, 
governance, discipline, and resources, business people can 
implement change an order-of-magnitude faster than with a 
traditional approach.
2. The business knowing and managing its own rules.
Many business rules projects are not system development 
projects. Organizations have business rules that are embedded 
in knowledge workers’ heads, buried deep in system code, and/
or hidden in agreements or policies (that are often not complied 
with). With knowledge workers retiring or changing frequently, 
 Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
1
2
 the loss of corporate memory is starting to take a toll on 
organizations worldwide. The business rule approach addresses 
the core of this issue. Ian Cole of Strategic Technology for 
Starwood Vacation Ownership  agrees: 
“Our original use of a rules product was to go back and 
codify twenty-five years of contractual ownership rights that 
really were not documented anywhere. And today, we still 
haven’t automated the majority of them, but we at least now 
have a fair body of knowledge of them.”[2]
3. The business having better guidance and making 
better decisions.
Are your business rules enforced consistently throughout 
different areas in your organization? Are your operational workers 
within your organization making smart decisions? Externalizing 
your business rules, specifying a business rule only once, and 
managing your rules as a first-class citizen are keys to an agile 
business. “Business rules ensure your business works smart,” 
declares Ron Ross, author of Business Rules Concepts .[3]
There are many drivers for business rules. However, don’t let the 
new-novelty technical features cloud your judgment. There will 
always be better features tomorrow. Hold true to the business 
benefits. Stay focused and build your method, team and tool 
(and features) toward the business vision. I didn’t give in to my 
daughter’s wish for novelty technical features; you shouldn’t 
either! References
[1] “Business Rules Forum 2009 Practitioners’ Panel: 
The DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules,” Business 
Rules Journal,  Vol. 11, No. 4 (Apr. 2010).  Available 
at: http:// www.BRCommunity.com/a2010/b530.html 
[2] “Business Rules Forum 2009 Practitioners’ Panel: 
The DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules,” Business 
Rules Journal,  Vol. 11, No. 4 (Apr. 2010). Available 
at: http:// www.BRCommunity.com/a2010/b530.html 
[3] Business Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of 
Knowledge  (Fourth Edition), by Ronald G. Ross 
(April 2013). ISBN 0-941049-14-0. Available at 
http://www.brsolutions.com/b_concepts.php Mistake 1: 
Treating Business Rules 
Initiatives Simply as
IT Projects
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
 
3Mistake
2 Not Focusing on Terminology
My daughter just got her driver’s license. A new driver in 
Vancouver, BC, has to drive with a logo ‘N’ displayed at the back 
of the car for two years. One of the rules for an ‘N’ driver is that 
she can take only one non-family member in the car. 
One afternoon, my 80-year-old mother asked for a ride home. I 
told her, “No problem; you have a granddaughter who can drive 
now.” I sent my daughter. 
Unbeknownst to me, my mother had just finished having dim 
sum with three friends, who also needed a ride. My daughter, 
being very protective of her newly-earned license, explained to 
my mother that she could take only one non-family member. My 
mother’s immediate response was, “They are all family. Grandma 
Alice (it does not help that in Chinese tradition, everyone in your 
grandma’s generation is called ‘Grandma’) is your mother’s 
second cousin’s mother-in-law; Grandma Josephine babysat 
you when you were little, and Grandma Laura is my best friend 
since high school.”
At this point, my daughter was almost in tears. She just could not 
explain to Grandma what ‘family’ meant. She called me to the 
rescue. I drove another car to chauffeur my mother and all her 
friends to their homes. All ended well. However, you can see how 
a rule is only as good as the understanding of the terminology 
used in the rule. According to my mother, almost everyone she 
knows is ‘family’.
Concise and consistent understanding of business vocabulary is 
even more important in a business environment. Imprecise use 
of vocabulary can cause great frustration. 
I fly a lot. The airline where I am a Platinum Million Mile member 
lost my luggage. To compensate for their mistake they sent me 
the following Customer Care Certificate to be used on my next 
purchase:When I went to use the Customer Care Certificate, this was the 
screen I was presented with. It gave me the options of ‘Nothing 
to redeem’, ‘Redeem a gift certificate’, or ‘Redeem a travel 
certificate’.
I looked at my certificate. It said ‘Customer Care Certificate’. 
Now what do I do? They lost my luggage and they gave me this 
certificate. Does that mean this is a gift certificate? I clicked ‘gift 
certificate’ and was presented with:

4I looked at my Customer Care Certificate again. I couldn’t see 
a ‘Gift Certificate Number’. I do have a ‘Certificate PIN’. Just as 
anyone else would have done in this situation (I’m pretty sure) I 
typed the Certificate PIN number in the Gift Certificate Number 
box and clicked ‘Apply’. WRONG! ‘Invalid Number’ the screen 
told me. Urrgh!
Next, I clicked ‘Redeem a travel certificate’. This was what I 
got:
I saw ‘Program Year’. I had no idea what the Program Year was. 
They lost my luggage. I didn’t join any program. 
I was about to give up but then I saw ‘Certificate Program 
PIN’. I looked at my Customer Care Certificate again. I have a 
‘Certificate PIN’. I thought two out of three ain’t bad . I gave it one 
more try. I typed the ‘Certificate PIN’ in the ‘Certificate Program 
PIN’ box, hit ‘Apply’, and kept my fingers crossed. 
BINGO! It worked. However, by now, this airline’s valued Platinum 
Million Mile member was totally frustrated. This could have been 
easily avoided if their terminology had been consistent.
Vocabulary issues magnify even more with business rules. 
Imagine if the airline had three simple rules:
1. A Gift Certificate must not exceed $1,000. 
2. A Travel Certificate must not exceed $2,000. 
3. A Customer Care Certificate must not exceed $3,000. References
[1]  Fact Modeling is described by Ron Ross in Business 
Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of Knowledge , 
available at http://www.BRSolutions.com/b_
concepts.phpWhat if my Customer Care Certificate was $2,200? If I tried 
to redeem under ‘Travel Certificate’, it would say that I had 
exceeded the limit because a Travel Certificate needs to be 
less than $2,000. Can you imagine my frustration if that had 
happened? Even worse, what if the screen did not tell me what 
was wrong. What if it simply rejected my $2,200 redemption 
without providing any clear direction on what to do to correct it? 
I’m sure you can all relate. We’ve all experienced similar 
frustrations.
What is important to recognize is that these issues are not 
system issues. They are business issues. It is imperative that 
the business recognizes the need for consistent terminology 
and has a method to use consistent terminology. One common 
Business Vocabulary modeling technique is Fact Modeling.[1]
Lastly, I like to tell my clients that I can easily provide an estimate 
for specifying their business rules, given a scoped area. I like 
to also tell them that if they don’t need me to align the rules 
with business vocabulary with the rigor that we practice, I can 
actually do the rules in half the time. The resulting set of rules 
will look very solid – just like in my three examples above. 
However, issues will likely not surface until the damage is done 
(i.e., when the client stumbles into the issue). Keep this in mind 
when you are writing business rules: the terminology is your key 
to success.
Mistake 2: 
Not Focusing on 
Terminology
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
 
5Mistake
3 Assume Everyone Knows What a Business Rule Is
My daughter is in the process of applying to universities. 
If you have gone through that process, you can empathize with 
my anxiety. The university application process is daunting and 
full of rules. There are rules for acceptance. For example, if 
a student is accepted through early decision, he or she must 
enroll at that university and withdraw all applications to other 
universities. 
There are also rules for applying, of which the most important 
are related to essay submissions. Each university requires 2-3 
essays. Each essay has word or character count limits. For my 
daughter, the shorter the essay requirement, the longer it takes 
her to write. She is applying to 10 universities ... Translation: 
Having to endure her writing process for 20-30 essays, with an 
average of 6 revisions for each. You do the math. 
You can’t imagine my jubilation when I saw the instruction on 
one of the applications that read: “The following essays are 
optional – and yes, they truly are optional! If you choose not to 
answer them, your chance of admission will not be affected.” I 
was so excited and exclaimed to my daughter, “Look, you don’t 
need to do essays for that university.” Her immediate response 
was, “Yes, I do, Mom. It’s the rule.” At that point I realized my 
daughter does not know what a rule is. 
One of the best parts of my job is the opportunity to visit major 
organizations worldwide. In guiding organizations in the business 
rules approach, one of the first things that becomes clearly 
apparent is that different people have different perceptions of 
business rules. 
So, if you are embarking on a project on business rules, do not 
assume everyone knows what a business rule is or assume 
everyone thinks about business rules the same way you do.
• Some people might think business rules are requirements: 
“Provide a feature to handle electronic funds transfer.”
• Some people might think business rules are use case 
statements: “Customer provides account ID. System 
displays account information.”• Some people might think business rules are system ‘if/then’ 
statements: “If the overdrawn flag is set to ‘yes’, then reject 
transaction.”
So what is a business rule? The definition I like is from Guide 
1995: “A statement that defines or constrains some aspect of the 
business… [which is] intended to assert business structure, or to 
control or influence the behavior of the business.”[1] 
By that definition, business rules related to the requirement, use 
case, and system ‘if/then’ statements given above might be, 
respectively:
• Each employee expense reimbursement must be processed 
through electronic funds transfer.
• A customer must have a valid account ID.
• An account must not be overdrawn. … An account may 
be considered overdrawn only if the amount of a cash 
withdrawal is greater than the balance of the account at the 
time of the withdrawal.
You can read more about the definition of business rules in Ron 
Ross’s book Business Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of 
Knowledge, 4th Edition .[2] Clearly a guru in the field, he has also 
published an article on BRCommunity.com on this subject: “Five 
Tests for What Is a Business Rule? ”[3]
My advice is to have a clear definition of business rules before 
you start a project. However, the definition in itself is not enough. 
In order for a project focused on business rules to be successful, 
you will also need to know:
1. The level of detail you want your business rules expressed 
at. Business rules can be expressed at a very high level, 
like a policy statement, or be very detailed, showing all 
conditions of the business logic.
2. How you want to group sets of business rules that provide 
complete business logic for guidance or operational business 
decisions.
6
 3. How you want to express your business rules. In Business 
Rule Solutions, we use RuleSpeak®[4] for business rule 
statements and Q-Charts™[5] for decision structures.
4. Whether you need to capture business rules or system rules 
or both.
5. How you want to manage the business rules you discover 
(which I can guarantee will be in the hundreds, if not 
thousands).
6. How the business rules deliverable gets integrated into the 
rest of your project deliverables (i.e., use cases, business 
requirement documents, etc.). 
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need to 
remember:
• Business rules are lists of statements that tell you whether 
you may (or may not) do something or that give you the 
criteria and conditions for making an operational business 
decision. Make sure you and everyone involved in the 
project know what that means.
• You must define some basic principles for business rules 
before you start your project.
• You will harvest a LOT of business rules. Knowing in 
advance how to write them, find them, categorize them, and 
manage them is essential. References
[1] Business Rules Group. [July 2000]. Defining 
Business Rules ~ What Are They Really?  (4th Ed). 
Available at: http://www.BusinessRulesGroup.org 
Note:  Formerly known as the GUIDE Business Rules 
Project Report , (1995). 
[2]  Business rules are detailed by Ron Ross in Business 
Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of Knowledge , 
available at http://www.BRSolutions.com/b_
concepts.php 
[3]  Ronald G. Ross, “Five Tests for What Is a Business 
Rule?” Business Rules Journal, Vol. 11 , No. 10 (Oct. 
2010). Available at: http://www.BRCommunity.com/
a2010/b556.html 
[4]  RuleSpeak® is a set of guidelines developed by 
Ron Ross for expressing business rules in concise, 
business-friendly fashion. For details refer to http://
www.RuleSpeak.com/en/ 
[5]  For more information on Q-Charts™ refer to http://
www.brsolutions.com/b_decision.php Mistake 3: 
Assume Everyone 
Knows What a 
Business Rule Is
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
 
7Mistake
4 Not Managing Business Rules from the Start 
Here’s a sampler from our conversations at home. Remember, 
we have a teenage daughter in the house.
“I’m going out with Julia tomorrow. Please don’t tell 
Veronica.”
“Arthur is having a party this weekend with Jonathan, Jesse, 
Veronica, and Michael. Julia and Alex are not invited so 
please don’t tell them.”
“If Sam calls, tell him we’re at the library and he can meet us 
there. If Veronica calls, you don’t know where we are. She 
doesn’t like Sam so we don’t want her going to the library 
and seeing us hanging out with him.”
Then of course Veronica’s mother calls and who answers the 
phone? My husband . 
She wants to know if we can give Veronica a ride home 
this weekend from the party and he says yes. Then, he 
proceeds to ask if we need to give her a ride home from 
the library today (which, of course, Veronica doesn’t know 
about). I wave my hands frantically, trying to stop him from 
talking about the library. He tries to change the subject and 
suggests that he can give Julia a ride home from the party 
as well, which, of course, is not good either since you’ll recall 
that, in this soap opera, Julia was not invited. At this point, he 
hands the phone over to me to rescue the situation.
As you can see, it is hard to keep track of even a few simple 
rules. In order to comply with all these rules, it would be 
extremely helpful if the rules could be organized so that we 
could find the rules for a particular event, a particular friend, 
a particular date, or any combination of those.
Your organization has lots of business rules. One of the 
first principles of the Business Rules Manifesto[1]  is to 
treat business rules as a first-class citizen . This means 
externalizing your business rules from all your documents 
and managing them on their own right. 
Business rules are embedded in business documents, such 
as agreements, regulations, and marketing materials, or in 
requirement documents, such as use cases and business 
requirements documents. For a business rules project, these business rules should be specified independently from the 
other deliverables.
When you conduct a project using the business rules 
approach, you are going to specify a lot of business rules. 
These rules are not going to be very useful to you if they 
are not organized in a way that allows you to find and group 
them for review and analysis. I wrote an article back in 
2004 entitled Organizing a Pile of Rules .[2] All the concepts 
described in that article still hold true today. Let me expand 
on that article and discuss the traceability items you might 
need to manage your business rules. 
Traceability items are properties of a business rule that you 
might want to keep track of. My experience with different 
organizations is that each organization has very specific 
criteria for what they want to keep track of. Here are some 
that are most popular.
Source: Keeping track of where the business rule originates.  
The business rule can come from a law, regulation, contract, 
agreement, business policy … knowledge expert, from 
a physical document, or from system code. Knowing the 
source will allow you to answer the question, “Where did that 
business rule from?” 
Motivation:  Keeping track of why you have the business 
rule.
There are business rules where the motivation is fairly 
obvious. For example: “A canceled order must have a 
cancellation reason.” You can understand (or guess) the 
motivation for that business rule easily. 
However, other business rules have hidden motivation. 
For example: “A customer must not place more than three 
express orders in one day.” There could be many reasons for 
this business rule. Is it to avoid fraud? Is it because IT only 
allowed three slots for express orders in one day? Is it that if 
you provide a fourth express order, the system will abend? 
Whatever the reason, it is beneficial to keep track of the 
motivation once you figure it out. This will allow you to answer 
8
 the question, “Why did we have that business rule?” … and 
save a lot of re-discussion and re-investigation time.
Versions: Keeping track of different variations of the 
business rule.
When you’re deep in the trenches of rule harvesting, I can 
guarantee you will have a déjà vu  experience. You will often 
find yourself saying, “I’m sure I’ve written this business rule 
before!” Keeping track of different versions of your business 
rules will help you answer the question, “Have I done this 
before?”
Status:  Keeping track of the current status of the business 
rule.
You will need to review your business rules at different stages 
of the project with different audiences. It is extremely useful 
to know what status your business rules are in. Different 
types of project might require different statuses. The most 
common are: Approved; Under Review; Under Development; 
Implemented; Retired; Rejected. Keeping track of the status 
will allow you to extract the right set of business rules for the 
right audience at the right time.
Relationships:  Keeping track of the various kinds of 
relationships between business rules.
Business rules are often related to other business rules. 
In your rule analysis, you might find that a business rule 
is in conflict with another business rule. A business rule 
may support other business rules. A business rule may be 
interpreted from another rule.
Once these types of analysis have been done, it is good to 
capture the results. This will help you answer the question, 
“What business rules might be impacted if I change this 
business rule?”
By now, you might think there is a lot to do in rule 
management. You are correct. Business rule management 
is no small task. 
My advice is to always do what is useful and productive. Do 
not collect information about a business rule for the sake of 
collecting information. Know why you are doing it and what 
needs to be done.
Having an automated tool helps a lot. Microsoft Excel 
is the most common business rule management tool in References
[1] http://www.businessrulesgroup.org/brmanifesto.htm
[2] Gladys S.W. Lam, “Organizing a Pile of Rules,” 
Business Rules Journal , Vol. 5, No. 10 (October 
2004). Available at: http://www.BRCommunity.com/
a2004/b208.html
[3]  For more information on RuleXpress, refer to www.
RuleArts.com/RuleXpressthe marketplace. My 2004 article described some of the 
toolsets in the marketplace. Since then, several new tools 
have emerged. For a look at a best-of-breed tool, see 
RuleXpress.[3] 
My recommendation is start managing your business rules 
early in your project. The longer you wait, the more your 
business rules will pile up. You need a structured organizing 
scheme to keep your business rules at your fingertips, a 
process to keep your business rules up-to-date, and a tool to 
help store and report on your business rules.
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need 
to remember:
• Organize your business rules early in the project cycle.
• Organize your business rules by categorizing your 
business rules, by collecting traceability items, and by 
associating related business rules to each other.
• An automated business rule tool can be very helpful. If 
nothing else is available, use Excel. In any case make 
sure the organizing scheme you use is well-thought-
through. Mistake 4: 
Not Managing Business Rules 
from the Start 
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
 
9Mistake
5 Not Having the Right Business Infrastructure 
My daughter is the drama captain and a lead actor in her school 
musical production this year. The school has just put on five 
performances of their 2011 feature musical production, 25th 
Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee . 
As the mother of the drama captain, I got the ‘honor’ of buying 
gifts for key behind-the-scenes contributors for the musical. My 
daughter’s instruction was, “This is a spelling bee; the gift must 
have a bumble bee on it.” 
Have you ever tried looking for something with a bee on it in 
the middle of winter when there are three inches of snow on the 
ground? Not only did I have to find one gift, but I had to find six 
gifts – one for the assistant director, one for the stage manager, 
one for the assistant stage manager, one for the sound person, 
one for the light person, and one for the band manager. 
In sheer frustration from not being able to find the ‘right’ gifts, I 
broke down and asked my daughter, “Is this really necessary?” 
Her reply was simply, “Mother, these people are very important. 
Without them, the show wouldn’t be possible.” 
My daughter was right, of course; each of these supporting staff 
was just as necessary to the show’s well-being and success as 
the ‘stars’ were. Without the right infrastructure, the ‘show’ could 
not go on. The same applies to our business rules initiatives. 
Many organizations tell me that they want to adopt the business 
rules approach. As you may already know, the ultimate benefit 
of a business rules approach resides on the business side by 
enabling the business to take full control of its rules, to know and 
manage its rules, and to have better guidance and make better 
decisions.[1] In order to reap business benefits, the business 
needs to take on a lot more ownership.
I often see organizations having the right vision, recognizing the 
benefit, and buying the appropriate technical tools – tools that 
they know they need to train IT on. However, they often overlook 
the fact that the business  side also needs to be prepared. In 
order to achieve business success, a business infrastructure 
needs to be established.Frank Habraken, Program Manager of CSC – speaking on his 
experience in the Department of Immigration Australia – says it 
nicely: 
“The key piece, however, was governance and getting the 
organization to agree to particular terms and particular rules. 
Setting up that governance was critical. It’s basically what I 
call the ‘accelerator’ … or the ‘decelerator’. It doesn’t matter 
how good your engine is ... it doesn’t matter how good your 
people are. If you don’t have your governance approved, you 
might do okay for one little rules project … but once you’re 
up to about five or six that start to run into each other you’re 
in trouble.”[2]
Governance is critical to the success of your rule management 
activities. Governance is a process, organizational function, 
set of techniques, and system for putting business policy and 
regulations into operation. 
In order for the business rules approach to be beneficial for 
the business side, governance needs to be focused on using 
business rules to implement policy into actual operation. More 
specifically, governance needs to focus on guiding the conduct 
and decisions of the business – it is not about designing 
systems. Governance must flow top down from the executive of 
the organization. It can’t come from within the IT area. 
A viable governance structure depends a lot on the culture of 
the organization, the maturity level with business rules, and the 
scope of business rules and business decisions that require 
governing. 
Frank gave an example of a three-level governance process at 
the Department of Immigration:
1. The top row – the steering committee – was the Chief Legal 
Officer and the heads of each of the business divisions. 
They did the final signoff.
2. The level below that was their two Directors. They know how 
the business actually works, and they make the call in terms 
of “Yes, we agree with what’s here.” They also identify any 
issues based on their knowledge scope. 
10
Mistake 5: 
Not Having the Right 
Business Infrastructure 
3. The next layer down from that has the policy and legal 
people, who spend time debating particular rules and terms, 
and then feed them up the line. If they spend too long – if 
they argue for more than two hours on some particular thing 
– it goes straight up a level. And if there is any issue at that 
level, then it goes up to the top level. 
This three-level type of governance process is common to a 
great many organizations.
Alongside that process, the business/business rule analysts 
are working to specify, analyze, and annotate discussion and 
decisions. In order to do that, they need the right skill sets, 
methodology, tools, and support to enable effective results of 
managing business rules and business decisions. They need to 
be given sufficient training and focused time to learn. 
Often, a Center of Excellence for Business Rules and Business 
Decision Management is established in an organization to 
share the knowledge, to mentor and support, and to provide 
education on business rules and business decisions initiatives. 
This Center of Excellence also acts as the quality control point 
for the business rules and business decisions that are under 
management.
In summary, in order for the business to benefit, the business 
needs to take on more control, responsibility, and work. An 
effective governance process specifies the control and the 
responsibilities. A group of experienced business/business rule 
analysts, trained in the capture, analysis, management, and 
implementation of business rules, will enable the work to get 
done.
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need to 
remember:
• Establish a governance process to manage your business 
rules and business decisions.
• A Center of Excellence is recommended to effectively 
share knowledge, to mentor, to train, and to provide quality 
control.
• Business analysts and business rule analysts need to be 
provided with skills, tools, methodology, and support to do 
their job. References
[1]  Gladys S.W. Lam, “Top 10 Mistakes Business 
Analysts Make When Capturing Rules – Mistake 
#1: Treating Business Rules Initiatives Simply As IT 
Projects,” Business Rules Journal , Vol. 11, No. 11 
(Nov. 2010). Available at: http://www.BRCommunity.
com/a2010/b562.html 
[2] “Business Rules Forum 2008 Practitioners’ Panel: 
The Real World DOs and DON’Ts of Business 
Rules,” Business Rules Journal , Vol. 10, No. 3 (Mar. 
2009). Available at:   http://www.BRCommunity.com/
a2009/b465.html 
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
 
11Mistake 
6 Not Having Strong Sponsorship 
Children know about the importance of sponsorship at an early 
age. Any parent can tell you how quickly a child figures out which 
parent will let them get away with what. 
In my household, my husband is the generous one. So when 
my daughter wants that pair of designer jeans and I say no, she 
will say (you guessed it), “But Daddy  said I can.” On the other 
hand, dating is a hard thing for my husband to swallow. So my 
daughter will carefully ask me about going out before telling Dad. 
Of course, then she can say, “But Mommy  said I can.”
With business rules projects, sponsorship is especially important 
because it means both business and IT need to take on different 
roles than with traditional projects.
Mukundan Agaram, Enterprise Architect at Delta Dental of 
Michigan, and Kevin Chase, Project Director of Customer 
Information Technology Service Group at ING, said the following 
in the “DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules” Practitioners’ Panel 
at the 2009 Business Rules Forum:[1]
“Get executive buy-in early on. Educate them about what 
business rules can do for them; explain the value-add. 
You’ve got to do a lot of evangelism to get their buy-in 
because business rules, once you’ve put it in place, is a two-
headed monster – business and technology. As such, in the 
organization, you need the clout to bring both sides together 
and to lead it as one effort for the whole enterprise.…”  – 
Mukundan Agaram
“You need strong executive sponsorship, and evangelism 
is a good word for this. You really need strong evangelism, 
both at the grass roots level, which I provided early-on, but 
also at the executive level, which my boss provided.”  – Kevin 
Chase 
How do you get strong sponsorship? The key is having 
compelling business drivers. Business sponsors do not usually 
care about how something is done or what approach is used; 
they just want to know what business results are generated. To 
get a strong sponsor, you need strong business drivers. Below 
are some strong business drivers we have encountered over 
many years of working with different organizations worldwide:• Fiduciary Responsibilities Support.  Demonstrate 
compliance by officers of the organization with their fiduciary 
responsibilities.
• Risk Management.  Enable more effective, timely, and 
focused management of risks by monitoring performance 
around critical items of business policy and strategy. 
• Liability Management.  Reduce or eliminate legal and 
financial liabilities due to non-compliance with contractual 
obligations and statutory responsibilities. 
• Quality Assurance.  Ensure consistency in business 
behavior, and appropriate interactions with external 
stakeholders.
• Regulatory  Compliance.  Ensure conformance with 
external regulation.
• Agility. Ensure timely and coordinated deployment of 
changes in business policy and strategy.
• Knowledge Retention. Ensure that specialized 
knowledge, business intellectual property (IP), and core 
competencies are captured and managed rather than being 
tacit, so that survivability and sustainability is less dependent 
on individual workers.
• Accountability.  Ensure clear lines of responsibility for 
interpretations and deployments of business policy and 
regulation into day-to-day operations.
• Transparency.  Ensure that business activity subject to 
external regulation is conducted in a manner that can be 
fully audited.[2] 
The driver for sponsorship might also change over time. Before 
the global financial crisis in 2009, we had a major banking 
institution that adopted the business rules approach because 
they needed to be agile. They needed to change products 
and get new products out into the market place as quickly as 
possible. After the financial crisis, that driver changed. Instead 
of agility being the principal driver, they needed to demonstrate 
more risk adversity and transparency.
12
Mistake 6: 
Not Having Strong 
Sponsorship 
Another client, a not-for-profit joint powers agency, shares 
their experience about the benefit of using a business rules 
approach:[3] 
“The Independent System Operator (ISO) recently 
implemented the Market Redesign and Technology Upgrade 
(MRTU), a comprehensive program that enhances grid 
reliability and fixes flaws in the ISO markets. MRTU lasted 
three and a half years. Changes to the electricity market 
design meant constant change – weekly changes from the 
ISO for most of the last two years. Market defects would be 
found and ISO would change the rules accordingly. This in 
turn would mean our customer would need to update the 
rules in its systems.
Compared with how other organizations have implemented 
MRTU the results have been dramatic. While some groups 
of municipalities spent upwards of $10M on components 
and consulting over three years implementing the rules, 
our customer spent just $300,000 on components and 
consultation – a substantial reduction in costs. And this 
saving is in development cycle – ongoing maintenance will 
continue to be much less, boosting lowering the total cost of 
ownership over time.”
That is 97% savings. A very compelling business driver indeed!
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need to 
remember:
• Ensure you have a strong sponsor who can support you in 
both the business and IT.
• Be clear on the business drivers.
• Communicate and reconfirm the business drivers regularly. References
[1]  “Business Rules Forum 2009 Practitioners’ Panel: 
The DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules,” Business 
Rules Journal , Vol. 11, No. 4 (Apr. 2010). Available 
at: http://www.BRCommunity.com/a2010/b530.html
[2]  Business Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of 
Knowledge  (Fourth Edition), by Ronald G. Ross 
(April 2013). ISBN 0-941049-14-0. Available at: 
http://www.brsolutions.com/b_concepts.php
[3] From customer interviews conducted by James 
Taylor  (http://www.decisionmanagementsolutions.
com).
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
 
13Mistake
7 Not Having a Well-Defined Scope 
We all know how important having a well-defined scope is for 
any project activities. This is especially true for business rules 
harvesting projects. An additional process task, decision, or 
business concept could mean 10 to 100 rules. In my experience, 
any change in business scope always means some impact to 
business rules. The impact is never small.
Business rules need to be defined at the business level (not 
simply for just IT implementation). To do this, the scoping 
elements must be business friendly. Identify your scope criteria 
using business artifacts. The following are four very common 
scoping elements. You can define scope:
1. By Business Process Tasks.
This is perhaps the most common way of providing a boundary 
for business rules. In a business process model, identify the 
tasks that require business rules.
For example, here is a simple process flow for shipping 
antiques:
Each of these tasks may be guided by many business rules:
‘Pack Antique Art for Shipping’ – There are business rules on what 
packing materials must be used for what kinds of antiques.
‘Assign Security Guard’ – There are business rules on differently-
valued antiques being assigned to different security levels of 
guards.‘Notify Insurance Company’ – There are business rules on 
differently-valued or different types of antiques being insured by 
different insurance companies.
‘Notify Customer’ – There are business rules on who and where 
to notify the customer depending on destination.
‘Ship Antique’ – There are business rules on different types of 
antiques being shipped by different methods and different types 
of customers being given different shipping options.
Any one of these tasks can have anywhere from one to hundreds 
of rules, depending on the complexity of the business. Be very 
clear at the onset of the project which of these tasks is within 
scope for rule harvesting.
There is one thing I have learned about business rule projects. 
You can’t assume any one task is simple (with fewer business 
rules). 
For example, in almost any business, business rules around an 
address would be simple and standard. No one would allocate 
much time to harvesting address type business rules. However, 
at FedEx, they literally have thousands of rules about an address, 
rules that most businesses won’t care about. So, be careful of 
your scope. Do not assume simplicity.
2. By Decisions.
Identify the decisions that require business rules. Some 
decisions may be determining:
• Is the customer eligible for membership? 
• Is the customer eligible for a discount? 
• Is the employee qualified to perform the activity? 
Again, any of these decisions could require one or hundreds 
of business rules to determine outcome. Be clear which one is 
within scope.
3. By Business Concepts.
Any key concept that a business uses can have many rules 
around it. For example:
14 • Customer 
• Employee
• Claim 
• Antique 
Scoping at this high level is very dangerous. Can you imagine 
the number of business rules you might have pertaining to 
Customer? The more refined the concepts, the more precise the 
scoping. For example:
• Gold Customer or Delinquent Customer, instead of a just 
Customer
• Retired Employee or Temporary Employee, instead of just 
Employee
• Bodily Injury Claim or Glass Claim, instead of just Claim
• Oil Painting or Renaissance Sculpture, instead of just 
Antique 
4. By Source Document.
Identify the chapters, the sections, or the pages of a source 
document that are within scope. Be aware that a page in a 
source document can refer to business tasks, decisions, or 
business concepts that are in other parts of the document that 
can contain additional rules. Your scope can easily expand to 
cover the entire document if no other boundaries are identified. 
In order to get a precise scope, you need to combine the source 
document with one of the other three scoping items suggested 
above.
In fact, a combination of all four elements would provide the best, 
the most specific scope. For example, the scope for a business 
rules harvesting project could be:
• Business rules required to determine if a customer is a Gold 
Customer.
• Business rules that guide shipping antique art to Gold 
Customers.
• Business rules documented in “Chapter 4 – Gold Customer” 
of the Customer Service Guide. Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need to 
remember:
• Without clear scope, your business rules project can easily 
go on and on. Adding one small scoping element can mean 
hundreds of business rules and can mean impacts to 
existing business rules already harvested.
• When identifying your scoping elements, be as specific as 
possible.
• Use combinations of scoping elements to ensure precision 
and clarity in scope. 
Mistake 7: 
Not Having a 
Well-Defined Scope 
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
15Mistake
8 Not Having the Right Skill Set
As an only child, my daughter has been very well cared for (in 
other words, spoiled) all of her 18 years of life. 
My husband and I just installed our daughter at a university 
back east. When we stepped into her dorm room on the first 
day, we were greeted with a wooden bed, a wooden table, a 
plastic covered mattress, and dust balls rolling around the floor. 
My daughter took one look and announced that she would be 
late for orientation. Guess who was left with doing the clean up 
and furnishing of her dorm room? 
Talk about not having the right skill set. I have zero cleaning and 
decorating skills and my husband is no handyman. We ended 
up cleaning floors (on hands and knees); lugging a refrigerator, 
microwave, and shelves up five flights of stairs (my husband and 
I are not physically fit); putting up shelves (of course, it is only 
when you are 70% done that you realize you have to start all 
over again); and moving furniture (with what few muscles we 
have). 
At the end, I have to say the results were amazing. She now has 
a very comfortable, clean, and colorful room. My husband and I 
patted ourselves on the back. 
How did we achieve success when we are so unskilled to do the 
work? One answer: Because we wanted it badly. We had one 
goal – building my daughter a home away from home. We were 
focused on that goal and we did whatever it took.
Having the right skill set to do business rules type projects is 
essential, but what’s even more important is having the right 
vision or goal of what you want to do. Keep that focus. And the 
rest will fall into place.
Kelly Karlen (Manager, Business Rules Center of Excellence, 
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota) said this:
“Not everybody can be a good rules analyst – not even 
good business analysts … they don’t necessarily equate to 
a good analyst. You really need to make sure that you’re 
finding people with the right skill set; it’s a different mindset, 
to sit down and think through how your business is using its 
knowledge.”So, how do we train a good rules analyst? There are practical 
skills you can learn (which I believe is the easy part):
• Rule harvesting – knowledge about how to capture business 
rules from people’s heads, from documentation, and from 
system code.
• Rule specification – knowledge about how to express 
business rules in a consistent manner.
• Rule analysis – knowledge about how to analyze rules for 
duplication, redundancy and conflicts.
• Rule management – knowledge about how to organize a 
large set business rules.
• Vocabulary management – knowledge about how to define, 
model and manage corporate business terminology and 
concepts.
Kristen Seer, Senior Consultant, Business Rule Solutions, LLC 
said: 
“Being a Rule Analyst requires more than a set of learned 
skills; there is a certain personality that comes with the territory. 
Although the traits of this personality can be developed or 
refined, they cannot be taught.” 
I can’t agree with Kristen more. Rule analysis is not for everyone. 
Certain innate personality traits seem to pave the way for more 
natural rule analysis: 
• Strong analytical ability. A Rule Analyst must be able to 
partition a large set of rules in a logical fashion to enable 
validation and verification of rules. The ability to break things 
down into manageable parts is innate.
• Ability to see the ‘big picture’. While a Rule Analyst must be 
able to ‘break things down into parts’, he/she must also be 
able to keep the ‘big picture’ in mind. A Rule Analyst must 
be able to see how disparate projects or change initiatives 
fit together and impact each other, particularly with respect 
to rules.
• Ability to work at a detailed level. As well as being able to 
see the ‘big picture’, a Rule Analyst needs to be able to zero 
 
16 in on the smallest details, as it can be the little things that 
make or break the effectiveness of a business rule. 
Refer to Kristen’s articles[1] for more information on different 
personality traits and skills required for a Rule Analyst.
As Kelly Karlen mentioned above, a Rule Analyst needs to have 
a different mindset. The mindset she refers to is the ability to 
see business rules as a commodity of its own right – the ability 
to see business rules outside the context of process, people or 
events. This is especially difficult for those of us who have an IT 
background. We like to see things in a procedural manner (i.e., 
first do this, then do that, etc). 
True business rules thinking requires a type of declarative 
thinking . One of Ron Ross’s favorite examples is from the Ten 
Commandments: “Thou shalt not kill.” There is no “If you kill, then 
this.” There is no way to specify all situations where you “shalt 
not kill.” A rule (in this case, a commandment) is just that – a 
declarative statement that can be applied in endless situations. 
A good Rule Analyst has to be able to identify the rule and 
then identify the processes, people or events that it guides or 
constrains. This kind of thinking requires a different mindset. 
Reading helps; training helps; but most importantly, it is the 
willingness of the analyst to open his/her mind to a different type 
of thinking. This comes back to focusing on the goal. Just as 
my husband and I had the determination to build a comfortable 
‘home’ for my daughter, the analyst has to have the right attitude 
to accept a new way of thinking. 
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need to 
remember:
• The most important skill is not a skill. It is the analyst’s 
willingness to accept a new way of thinking.
• Practical skills can be trained.
• Rule analysis requires an analyst to be able to see the big 
picture, to be able to logically break things down into smaller 
parts, and to be able to be meticulous with details. References
[1]  Kristen Seer, Senior Consultant, Business Rule 
Solutions, LLC, wrote a series of articles on 
different personality traits and skills required for a 
rule analyst:
• Kristen Seer, “The Role of Rule Analyst (part 
1),” Business Rules Journal,  Vol. 6, No. 11 (Nov. 
2005). Available at: http://www.BRCommunity.
com/a2005/b255.html
• Kristen Seer, “The Role of Rule Analyst (part 2),” 
Business Rules Journal , Vol. 7, No. 1 (Jan. 2006). 
Available at: http://www.BRCommunity.com/
a2006/b264.html
Mistake 8: 
Not Having the 
Right Skill Set
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
17Mistake
9 Not Having a Business Rule Methodology
My husband is the chef in our family. Everyone who knows us 
knows that. He cooks like any Chinese would cook … no recipe. 
A dash of this, a pinch of that … voila! A tasty dish! 
Now that our daughter is away at university, he has decided to 
open a restaurant as a pastime. He determined very quickly that 
he cannot be the sole chef of the restaurant. He needs some 
way to pass down to his hired chef his methods for creating his 
signature dishes. To do that, he would have to create a set of 
recipes. A recipe would allow him to ensure quality when different 
chefs are working on the same dish.
There’s no difference when adopting a business rules approach. 
If you are the only person doing the work and if you know what 
do to, a formal methodology might not be necessary. You can 
adjust, adapt and learn as you go. 
However, if there is a team who needs to produce deliverables 
that have to fit together at the end, it is good – in fact, necessary 
– to have a recipe (i.e., methodology). A methodology allows 
you to have:
• A repeatable process. 
• Consistent deliverables. 
• Sharable knowledge. 
For business rules projects, you need a methodology that 
addresses the following areas:
1.  Rule harvesting. A set of processes and techniques to 
extract rules from …
• Subject area experts in facilitated sessions or one-on-one 
interviews.
• Documentation by identifying processes, decisions, 
and policies and by asking the right questions to extract 
business rules.
• System code by reversing engineering system logic to 
business logic and by distinguishing business rules from 
system rules. 
2. Rule specification. A set of processes and techniques to …• Write business rule statements in a consistent manner. 
We use RuleSpeak®.[1] 
• Develop decision logic. We use our Q-Chart technique, 
which is based on Question, Condition, Outcome, and 
Exceptions.[2] 
• Specify decision tables. Our decision table layouts are 
described in the same Q-Charting paper. 
3.  Rule analysis. A set of processes and techniques to analyze 
for …
• Duplication, redundancy, subsumption, and conflicts in 
rules.
• Impact to existing rules when a rule is changed, deleted, 
or added.
• Reuse of existing business rules, rather than creating new 
ones for each initiative or each business area. 
4. Rule management. A set of processes and techniques to …
• Provide governance when business rule changes are 
needed.
• Organize a large set of business rules.
• Report on business rules from different perspectives.
• Establish relationships between business rules or 
business rule sets.
• Set up traceability of business rules from source to 
implementation. 
5. Vocabulary management. A set of processes and techniques 
to …
• Define business concepts.
• Organize business concepts.
• Resolve synonyms and homonyms. 
The methodology that I am advocating in this piece focuses 
on the business side of the business rules approach. I believe 
 
18that is the critical stage of a business rules project. Paul Avilez, 
Principle Software Developer, Liberty Mutual, shares my view:
“Do invest your time in your rule harvesting and elaboration work. 
On average we now find that close to 75-80% of the time it takes 
to complete a rule is spent in the elaboration (specification). 
Coding the rule and testing it takes next to nothing once the 
elaboration is done.”[3]
Naturally there is methodology required for business rules 
implementation. This implementation methodology will need to be 
heavily dependent on your business rule technical environment 
(i.e., specific business rules engine or different implementation 
platform).
Once you have a methodology, I strongly recommend that you 
fine-tune it from your everyday learning. In my experience, 
an established, proven methodology is good for helping an 
organization kickstart the business rules approach. However, 
the methodology is most beneficial when it is refined over time, 
based on the maturity level, skill sets, timeline, and culture of 
the organization.
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need to 
remember:
• A methodology allows you to have a repeatable process, 
consistent deliverables, and sharable knowledge.
• A business-focused methodology for capturing, specifying, 
analyzing, and managing business rules and business 
vocabulary is as important as a system implementation 
methodology.
• Your methodology needs to be refined as the organization 
matures through the business rules approach. References
[1] For RuleSpeak, visit http://www.rulespeak.com/en/
[2]  A paper on Q-Charting is available at http://www.
brsolutions.com/b_decision.php
[3]  “Business Rules Forum 2009 Practitioners’ Panel: 
The DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules,” Business 
Rules Journal , Vol. 11, No. 4 (Apr. 2010). Available 
at: http://www.BRCommunity.com/a2010/b530.html
Mistake 9: 
Not Having a 
Business Rule 
Methodology
1Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
19Mistake
10 Not Communicating 
In this final piece of the series I thought it would be fitting to 
talk about communication. I certainly hope that all of you will 
continue to communicate with me through reading my articles 
on BRCommunity.com, linking to me in LinkedIn, and following 
me on Twitter (@GladysLam).
My daughter does not communicate. I don’t mean the usual 
teenage thing where teenagers don’t talk to their parents. 
I mean she simply forgets to tell us significant events she 
encounters or achievements at school. What my husband and 
I get are all the issues: she does not understand anything the 
math teacher says; her chemistry project blew up; or her friends 
are not talking to her. 
In real life she is an A+ student, receives chemistry awards, 
and is very popular with her friends. When I ask her why she 
doesn’t tell us all her achievements, she simply says, “I don’t 
want to be boastful.” I had to explain to her that communicating 
facts is not boastful.
I see the same thing happen with business rules projects. I 
have worked with many wonderful business analysts and 
business rules analysts who are so ‘heads down’ doing the 
work that they forget to communicate the wonderful work they 
have done. 
Remember that the business rules are the business logic for 
the organization. Very often it contains the business’ intellectual 
property and comprises the organization’s competitive 
advantage. Once this proprietary know-how is captured, it 
should be shared with the appropriate people.
Kelly Karlen – Manager, Business Rules Center of Excellence, 
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota – shared her experience:
“We had sixty-six rules, and with those sixty-six rules we 
found we had twenty-four gaps or conflicts that we had 
identified simply by documenting it ... by getting it on paper. 
We had our Legal and Compliance area in there; we had 
our COO in there. And they were amazed at some of the 
things we were out of compliance on. We just had never sat 
down and looked at everything together, cohesively around that scope. And our COO immediately asked, ‘What’s your 
next project?’”[1] 
As a business rules analyst, one of your primary roles is to 
capture the business rules and communicate them to the 
appropriate parties. If you want to achieve the right results 
from your communication you must relate the right content to 
the right audience in the right way. An executive might not be 
interested in all the conditions you identified in your business 
rules to catch fraudulent activities, but he/she would be very 
interested that the business rules identified 1,000 fraudulent 
activities and saved the company close to $1,000,000. 
On the other hand, while an IT developer might not care too 
much about how much that business rule might potentially save 
the company, he needs to know the details of the business rule 
showing all the conditions to detect fraud as identified by the 
business. If he gets that wrong, that business rule will not be 
effective.
In a business rules project you want to communicate:
• Business decisions and business rules sets.
• Business concepts and their clear definitions.
• The approach that is used.
• Any findings (any conflicts, gaps, inaccuracies, and 
redundancies you discovered during your analysis).
• Successes. 
The audience of your communication should be …
• Executives.
• Business stakeholders impacted by, but not directly 
involved in, your project.
• Business stakeholders directly involved in your project.
• Project team members.
• IT. 
 
20
 Again, the key to success is tailoring the message and the 
content to the right audience.
• For executives:  You want to highlight the successes, 
communicate the business benefits, and describe some 
key findings. They likely care less about the detailed 
business rules.
• For business stakeholders impacted by, but not directly 
involved in, your project:  You would want to bring in a 
little more of the key decisions and some high-level 
business rules. For this audience, you might need to 
simplify the business rule sets for easy understanding. 
Use graphical representation to show dependencies and 
impacts whenever appropriate. 
• For business stakeholders directly involved in your 
project:  You should be communicating with them 
regularly during the course of the project. They need to 
be involved in reviewing and validating the decisions and 
business rules. However, the business rule statements 
and decision tables presented to them should be 
simplified. Use graphical representation whenever 
possible. Business logic can be very complex. A walk-
through and detailed explanation by the business 
rule analyst involved with the business rule set would 
probably achieve the best result. 
• For the project team: The project team should be given 
updated concept definitions and business rule sets on a 
regular basis. Major changes should be reviewed and 
walked-through in order for the team to understand 
impact.
• For IT: They need to be given all the detailed concept 
definitions and business rules sets. They must 
understand all the intricacies of each business rule and 
how the business rule relates to other business rules.
You might be thinking that there is a lot to communicate here. 
Where do I get the information to communicate? 
I can guarantee you that if you are conducting a business rules 
project with the right discipline, the above content just falls out 
naturally. The business rules will have all the details. Once you 
have the details, simplifying them is easy. If you do analysis of 
business rule sets, you will find conflicts, gaps and inaccuracies 
… and if there aren’t any, that is good to communicate too (!). References
[1]  “Business Rules Forum 2007 Practitioners’ Panel: The 
DOs and DON’Ts of Business Rules,” Business Rules 
Journal, Vol. 9, No. 4 (Apr. 2008). Available at:  http://
www.BRCommunity.com/a2008/b408.html Kelly’s experience (above) of success from just identifying the 
business rules themselves is shared by many practitioners. 
All in all, the fact that you have a project to externalize and 
manage your business rules is in itself beneficial to the 
company. Installing key performance indicators to monitor the 
implementation of those business rules will provide you even 
more information on ROI that can be communicated.
Just Remember …
Plainly speaking, here are some of the main things you need 
to remember:
• Don’t just be ‘heads down’ and do work. Look up and 
spend time communicating the good work you are 
doing.
• Communicate the right content to the right audience in 
the right format.
• What you need to communicate naturally falls out of 
what you are doing; there’s no need to go searching for 
content. 
Mistake  10: 
Not Communicating 
Business Rule Initiative Checklist o
 ❑1. Know What ‘Business Rule’ Means 
 ❑2. Concentrate on the Business Benefit 
 ❑3. Build a Business Structure 
 ❑4. Manage Business Rules for the Business 
 ❑5. Focus on Business Vocabulary 
 ❑6. Define Scope Early 
 ❑7. Secure Strong Sponsorship 
 ❑8. Communicate Constantly 
 ❑9. Foster the Right Skill-Set 
 ❑10. Adopt a Business Rule Methodology 
4
4
4
4
4
421
 Mistakes Companies Make When 
Conducting Business Rules Projects10Top
4
4
4
4
4

22Now that you have heard so much about me from my 
mom’s articles, it’s time I return the favor. My name is 
Vanessa Lam, and I am Gladys’ only daughter. Here I 
have written a short biography of my mom. I think you’ll 
find it interesting …
Some 52 years ago in rural China, Sui Wah Chiu 
was born. At three pounds and a handful of ounces, 
her chances of survival were not looking good. They 
slimmed even further when she was ten days old, when 
her mother was forced back into the fields and Sui Wah 
was sent to live with her grandmother’s sister. 
The early 1960s were a turbulent time for China, and it 
became clearer and clearer that the Communist regime 
would take radical measures. Sui Wah’s parents knew 
that this was no place to raise a child, so they made 
the decision that no parent wants to make – to send 
their first born child away in hopes of having a better 
life. At the age of one, Sui Wah was smuggled out of 
China into British-controlled Hong Kong to live with her 
grandparents.
That was my mother’s first taste of adventure and travel, 
but certainly not her last. Her childhood was spent 
wandering alone through the streets of Hong Kong and 
ordering around the maids in her grandfather’s house. 
For the most part, Sui Wah was alone; her grandparents 
cared for her, but they never had time to raise her. She 
attended an English school in Hong Kong, where she 
was given the name Gladys. 
At age 12, Gladys’s grandparents knew they were too 
old to take care of her any longer. However, they could 
not send her back to China, for that would mark the 
end of her freedom. For a second time, Gladys was 
wrenched from her life and plopped into a new one, this 
time in Vancouver, Canada. 
There, her aunt and uncle took her in and sent her to a 
secondary school not far from their home. However, to 
Gladys’s dismay, practical English in a Canadian school 
was vastly different from English classes in a Hong Kong 
school. Her six years of learning to conjugate verbs and 
spell words about food and transportation could not help 
her when it came to making friends. Instead of giving 
up, Gladys took it as a challenge. She refused to speak 
Chinese to the few Asian classmates she had, and made 
every effort to be friends with native English speakers. 
Before long, she found herself with friends that had 
never spoken a word of Chinese in their lives.
Just as she was getting settled into high school life, 
it was time to leave. Accepted into the University of 
British Columbia (UBC), she pursued a computer 
science major, a degree she would use throughout her 
professional career. It was to that faculty that her future 
husband followed her (not that he would ever use the 
degree), and seven years later they married, giving her 
the name she goes by today: Gladys Lam.
Over the next several years, Gladys grew rapidly in 
her career. From a denim store retailer to banking, 
she finally found her place running her own consulting 
company, Elite Consulting Group. In the meantime she 
earned enough to sponsor her parents and two younger 
siblings to join her in Canada. 
A 
Bit 
of 
History …Seven years following their marriage, Gladys and Sunny 
made the most important decision of their lives—having 
me! Not that it seemed that way at the time. While my 
mother was in labor with me, she was on the phone 
negotiating contracts with two clients. After I was born, 
the only reason she stayed in the house was because 
her mother made her; it is Chinese tradition that the 
mother cannot leave home for one month after her child 
is born. The day the month ended, my mother hopped 
on a helicopter and was off to Victoria Island, where she 
was working on a consulting project.
My mother continued with this double life until I was 
three, when she became partners with Ron Ross. This 
is when she had her second child, a rambunctious, 
troublesome son named Business Rule Solutions, LLC 
(BRS). He was, and continues to be, that annoying little 
half brother. While my mother was teaching me to read 
and changing my dirty diapers, she also had to deal with 
whatever the brat spit up – anything from needing a new 
book published to flying across the globe to give talks.
My mom spent a lot of time with BRS, always off to some 
new place. She spent a lot of time going all over the 
USA, many places across Europe, and some in Asia. 
When I was young, I’m told I used to cry when she 
left. But I can’t remember those days. Since I can first 
remember, I was proud of my mom and proud of that 
little brother named BRS. When I was six, I would tell 
my friends that my mother was in Washington, DC , in 
Texas, in England. When I was ten, I would tell them 
that my mother published a book, and the author (Ron) 
dedicated it to me. When I was sixteen, I told her that I 
wanted to be a consultant, just like her. 
Now that I’m nineteen, I’m telling her I’m going to travel 
too. At college on the East Coast, these days I see my 
mom when she’s at work travelling, instead of at home. 
My little baby brother is not such a baby anymore, 
either. He has matured quite a bit and has a bunch of 
new additions like BRCommunity, AttainingEdge, and 
the Building Business Capability conference. My mom 
makes sure they all behave as they should and makes 
sure that all her children grow up to be successful. 
No one would have expected my mother to be where 
she is today. From those modest beginnings on a 
farm in China, who could have known that the twelve-
year-old who could barely speak English would grow 
up to become an internationally recognized lecturer, 
consultant and publisher? It’s a dream even many 
native North Americans could not imagine. All in all, I 
think her parents’ wish for a better future for her turned 
out alright, don’t you?
Vanessa Lam
Candidate for a Bachelor of Science in Economics
The Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania 
Class of 2015
August 17, 2012
?
$
@
+
%
!
<>About ...
Business Rule Solutions, LLC (BRS)  is the international leader 
in business analysis, business rule, and decision engineering 
techniques. BRS provides training, consulting and mentoring grounded in the business connection and focused on each company’s rich operational business know-how, its core intellectual property (IP). The BRS methodology, IPSpeak
TM, provides a 
structured approach to capture what makes your company smart (business strategy, business concepts, business rules, business decisions, and key performance indicators), develop world-class requirements from it, and achieve a winning, durable business solution. We can show you how to engage business stakeholders proactively in your projects. Our instructor-led interactive on-line training is convenient, effective and always highly rated. With 20 years experience in practical application for clients around the world, as well as extensive involvement in innovation, research and standardization, BRS is the world-recognized leader in the 
business rule and decision engineering space.  About Gladys S.W. Lam 
Gladys S.W. Lam is a world-renowned authority on applied business rule and decision techniques. She is Principal and Co-Founder of Business Rule Solutions, LLC (www.BRSolutions.com), the most recognized company world-wide in business rules and decision analysis. Ms. Lam is co-creator of IPSpeak
TM, the BRS methodology. She is 
Co-Founder of BRCommunity.com, a vertical community for professionals and home of Business Rules Journal. She co-authored Building Business Solutions: Business Analysis with Business Rules, with Ronald G. Ross, an IIBA® sponsored handbook on business analysis with business rules. 
Ms. Lam is widely known for her lively, pragmatic style. Ms. Lam is an internationally 
recognized expert on business rules and decision techniques.  She speaks worldwide at conferences and other professional events. She co-presents interactive online seminars.  She is also Executive Director of the Building Business Capability (BBC) Conference, which includes the Business Rules and Decisions Forum and is the official conference of the IIBA®. 
Ms. Lam is a world-renowned expert on business project management, having managed 
numerous projects that focus on the large-scale capture, analysis and management of business rules and decisions.  She works comfortably with senior executives providing insights and advice. She advises senior management of large companies on organizational issues and on business solutions to business problems. She is most effective with mentoring and training business analysts worldwide.
Ms. Lam is most recognized for her ability to identify the source of business issues, 
and for her effectiveness in developing pragmatic approaches to resolve them.  She has gained a world-class reputation for fostering positive professional relationships with principals and support staff in projects.
Ms. Lam graduated from the University of British Columbia with a B.S. in Computer 
Science.
TOP 10 Mistakes Companies Make 
When Conducting Business Rules Projects
by Gladys S.W. Lam
Glam@BRSolutions.com  
@GladysLam
(281) 217-9878
Building Business Capability (BBC) Conference: The annual Building 
Business Capability (BBC) Conference encompasses four co-located 
conferences: Business Rules Forum, Business Analysis Forum (the official conference of the IIBA®), Business Process Forum, and Business Architecture Summit. The BBC offers insight and expertise to help organizations create more effective, complete, and agile business solutions, especially involving automation. Gladys S.W. Lam is BBC Executive Director.  Visit BuildingBusinessCapability.com. 
Business Rules Community: BRCommunity.com is a vertical, non-
commercial community for business rule professionals.  BRCommunity provides articles, commentary, discussion areas, and a variety of other valuable hands-on resources. BRS established BRCommunity.com, and its flagship on-line publication, the Business Rules Journal, in 2000. The Journal (free) is known for its high-quality, non-commercial editorial focus. BRCommunity.com is the place to be for business rules! Visit BRCommunity.com.
