ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019)  417–424
1877-0509 © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V .
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )
Peer-review under responsibility of the Conference Program Chairs.
10.1016/j.procs.2019.04.057
10.1016/j.procs.2019.04.057 1877-0509 Available online at www.sciencedi rect.com  
ScienceDirect  
Procedia Computer Science 00 (20 19) 000 –000  
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia  
 
 
1877 -0509  © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY -NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/4.0/ )  
Peer-review under responsibility of the Conference Program Chairs.  The 10th International Conference on Ambient Systems, Net works and Technolog ies (ANT )  
April 29 – May 2, 2019, Leuven, Belgium  
Toward s an Ontology Based -Approach for Human Resource 
Management  
Wiem  Zaougaa, Latifa Ben Arfa  Rabaia,b,*,Wafa Rashid Alalyanib 
 
a  Strategies for Modelling and ARtificial inTelligence research Laboratory (SMART Lab),  
Institut Supérieur de Gestion de Tunis, Université de Tunis, Le Bardo, Tunis, Tunisia  
b  College of Business, University of Buraimi,Al Buraimi,P.C.512,Sultanate Oman  
Abstract  
Human Resources (HRs) as one of the most valuable asset of any organizations play a crucial role in their success. Within the  
context of project management, HR  Managemen t (HRM)  is perceived as an entire kn owledge a rea with defined processes, Tools 
and Techniques (T&T) in PMBOK 5th Guide. Although this g uide shows  a strong focus on HRM , it does not illustrate, in a clear 
way, how to perform each process with the required competencies and the related T&T. Hen ce, by using only PMBOK processes, 
the project manager cannot be assisted to select the suitable team according to their skills, also the project team members a re not 
able to interchange their competencies. To address these issues, we propose to use an ont ological  approach in order to build a 
common shared representation  in the HRM domain. This approach fosters the interoperability among HRs as well as their efficient 
use of T&T; further it can provide whom using PMBOK a better understanding and guidance fo r managing HRs with evidence.  
 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY -NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the Conference Program Chairs.  
Keywords: Human Resource Ontology; Domain Ontology; Human Resource Managem ent Processes; PMBOK . 
1. Introduction  
Over the last few years,  there is a growing attention toward HR s as one of the most valuable assets of any project 
and organization;  and managing  successfully this asset is crucial in project management [ 1, 2]. HR Management 
(HRM) is the means by which HRs interact effectively with motivation to achieve both project objectives and 
 
 
* Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai. Tel.: +968 -97-650-056; fax: +0 -000-000-0000.  
E-mail address:  latifa.rabai@gmail.com    Available online at www.sciencedi rect.com  
ScienceDirect  
Procedia Computer Science 00 (20 19) 000 –000  
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia  
 
 
1877 -0509  © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY -NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/4.0/ )  
Peer-review under responsibility of the Conference Program Chairs.  The 10th International Conference on Ambient Systems, Net works and Technolog ies (ANT )  
April 29 – May 2, 2019, Leuven, Belgium  
Toward s an Ontology Based -Approach for Human Resource 
Management  
Wiem  Zaougaa, Latifa Ben Arfa  Rabaia,b,*,Wafa Rashid Alalyanib 
 
a  Strategies for Modelling and ARtificial inTelligence research Laboratory (SMART Lab),  
Institut Supérieur de Gestion de Tunis, Université de Tunis, Le Bardo, Tunis, Tunisia  
b  College of Business, University of Buraimi,Al Buraimi,P.C.512,Sultanate Oman  
Abstract  
Human Resources (HRs) as one of the most valuable asset of any organizations play a crucial role in their success. Within the  
context of project management, HR  Managemen t (HRM)  is perceived as an entire kn owledge a rea with defined processes, Tools 
and Techniques (T&T) in PMBOK 5th Guide. Although this g uide shows  a strong focus on HRM , it does not illustrate, in a clear 
way, how to perform each process with the required competencies and the related T&T. Hen ce, by using only PMBOK processes, 
the project manager cannot be assisted to select the suitable team according to their skills, also the project team members a re not 
able to interchange their competencies. To address these issues, we propose to use an ont ological  approach in order to build a 
common shared representation  in the HRM domain. This approach fosters the interoperability among HRs as well as their efficient 
use of T&T; further it can provide whom using PMBOK a better understanding and guidance fo r managing HRs with evidence.  
 
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY -NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
Peer-review under responsibility of the Conference Program Chairs.  
Keywords:  Human Resource Ontology; Domain Ontology; Human Resource Managem ent Processes; PMBOK . 
1. Introduction  
Over the last few years,  there is a growing attention toward HR s as one of the most valuable assets of any project 
and organization;  and managing  successfully this asset is crucial in project management [ 1, 2]. HR Management 
(HRM) is the means by which HRs interact effectively with motivation to achieve both project objectives and 
 
 
* Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai. Tel.: +968 -97-650-056; fax: +0 -000-000-0000.  
E-mail address:  latifa.rabai@gmail.com   © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V .
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )
Peer-review under responsibility of the Conference Program Chairs.
418 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424
2 Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 
employee needs [3 ]. Within  the context of  project management, HRM is defined as a knowledge a rea in the Project 
Management Body Of Knowle dge (PMBOK) which is the international recognized consensus on this field  [4]. As a 
prominent managerial domain, HRM implies a multitude of tasks which are interpreted as a set of iterative and 
interrelated processes [5]. Considering  that managing HRs invo lves applying a set of interoperable knowledge, skills  
and T&T defined for such specific process . Thus,  when HRs are brought together as a team , a common shared 
framework is required to interchange their knowledge, skills and facilitates their proper use o f T&T . 
Although PMBOK 5th shows a strong focus on HRM as a knowledge a rea with defined processes and T&T, it does 
not illustrate, in a clear way, how to perform each process with the required competencies and the related T&T as 
depicted  in Fig.1.  
 
 
 
Fig. 1. PMBOK 5th  weak points related to Project HR  Management . 
All PMBOK weak points related to the lack of a clear  representation of knowledge derived from HRM processes 
as explained by Abd Elhameed [6], PMBOK  5th seems to ignore the relevance of k nowle dge flow theory which creates  
the environment within organization that enables the team interacting  with each other to interchange  their knowledge 
and experiences.  In the same line, Sheeba  et al. [4] demonstrate how PMBOK lacks the focus on a discipline approach 
that assigns tasks and responsibilities by using the interrelations between concepts in the domain of interest. To  address 
these issues, this work explores the use of ontology for b uilding a unified conceptual representation  that supports the 
HRM in PMBOK 5th.As ‘a formal, explicit description of a shared conceptualization’ [ 7], ontology is  the means to 
represent and share knowledge into  specific domain, provides a common vocabulary  as well as a description of the 
meaning of terms, as a way to promote interoperability, knowledge reuse and information integration . 
As shown in the literature review, there is a lack of a unified ontology for the four HRM processes  and each 
proposed ontol ogy considered a specific context, the main objective of this work is to develop a domain ontology  for 
HRM based on PMBOK 5th that (1) will provide  for the project manager and the project management team a common 
shared understanding about concepts related to specific process, (2) will enable the project team to better know how 
and why certain T&T could be used to perform such process, (3) will enhance the selection of team members according 
to their competencies; thus fostering the interoperability among HR s as well as their efficient use of T&T.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: section 2 outlines the project HR M based on PMBOK 5th. In 
Section 3 the related work is briefly reviewed. In section 4, we detail the proposed ontology. In the co nclusion, section 
5, we summarize the benefits of such ontology, present its limits and we propose some perspectives.  
2. Project Human R esour ce M anagement  
The P roject HR  Management Knowledge A rea defined as ‘ the processes that organize, manage and lead the project 
team’  to complete project successfully [5] . Four are the main processes  such as;  plan human resource ( identify the 
HRs with the required skills ), acquire project team ( approves the HRs availability and obtains the successful team ), 
develop project team  (improves competencies,  interaction among team member, and  overall team environment ), 
manage project team ( evaluates team performance, provides feedback, manages conflicts and resolves issues ).This 
knowledge area  allowed us to model the  following flow chart (Fig. 2 ).  

 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424 419  Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 3 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
      
 
Fig. 2. The Project HRM  Processes flowchart . 
As shown,  these processes  defined and executed in an orderly linear manner; even in some case, some processes 
will overlap and become iterative. HR M Processes are interrelated i.e. for each process; inputs are defined to produce 
the outputs as the results using T&T.  Based on Fig. 2, the relevant concepts and  their relationships for modeling  the 
proposed ontology  are gathered.  
3. Related work  
Since the emergence of ontological engineering in the field of project management, the use of ontology has been 
considered with great interest, e specially in HR management. For instance, Mochol el al. [8] have developed a HR -
Ontology to support the recruit ment process. T his ontology based on the German  version of the HR -XML standard 
developed by the HR -XML Consortium7; to provide means of semantic annotation of j ob postings and job applications 
by using controlled vocabularies. In a similar line, Gómez -Pérez et al. [9] proposed a “SEEMP Reference Ontology” 
based on standards to describe the detail of a job posting and the curricula data of a job seeker, by structuring thirteen 
sub-ontologies.  Recently, an ontology -supported web -based HR recruitment is proposed by Ma et al. [10] that exploit  
Formal Concept Analysis  (FCA) for building HR ontology, the proposed ontology performs the matching be tween the 
position requireme nts and applicants’ competences using ALN description logic. In [11], Strohmeier and Röhrs 
presented a methodical paradigm of conceptual modelling to the HRM domain in general and in employee assignment 
in particular by developi ng domain o ntology for employee assignment, the Ontology construction process follows two 
main steps: (1) choose an upper -level ontology to base the domain ontology  and (2) develop the domain ontology in 
reference to this upper -level ontology . Similarly, A ndrés Paredes et al. [12] developed an ontology -based approach 
with which to a ssign HRs to software projects, t his work explores the use of ontology for building a decision support 
system that help selecting the employees who are best fit within a new soft ware project. With regard to competence 
management, Schmidt and Kunzmann [13] presented a reference model for ontology -based approaches to competency - 

420 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424
4 Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 
oriented HR development that integrate management competencies and offer learning opportunities for employ ees. 
Other refer ence with similar focus is reported in Bodea and Dascălu [14 ]. In [15], Miranda et al.  developed a novel 
integrated model that represents  the knowledge related to competence management in the context of SIRET project.  
As each cited researc h addresses selectively only one HRM process and a unified  conceptual representation that  
cover s the overall HRM processes is miss ed, we propose an integration of the  four HR M processes defined in PMBOK 
5th in a common shared framework by considering their inputs, outputs a nd T&T.  
4. HR-Ontology based on METHONTOLOGY approach  
METHONTOLOGY presented by Fernandez -Lopez et al. [16], was adopted in this work; since unlike most of the 
methodologies discussed in literature [17] which lack sufficient  details and remain abstract, METHONTOLOGY 
covers enough details about the techniques and activities employed in it [16 ]. This  approach includes five main steps 
that represent the ontology development process (see  Fig. 3 ). Each of these steps and their out comes will be described 
below.  
Main Steps   Outcomes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig. 3. The ontology development process and their associated outcomes.  
• Specification:  during this step, the scope (why being build) and ontology users (who the end users are) are defined . 
To start with why it is being built, the need for the HR -Ontology is justified i n the Introduction and Related w ork 
sections. Referring to its users, proje ct manager and project management team who are the main responsible for 
HRs decision making  are selected . Also, companies ma y need the HR -Ontology to develop  decision s upport system 
that enhances HRM.  
• Conceptualization:  the conc eptualization was the key st ep in which the main concepts and their relationships are 
analyzed.  Fig. 4 shows the UML class diagram where the relevant classes (with  their attributes and their data types) 
and their relationships (with their cardinalities) are defined in accordance with the HRM knowledge area of 
PMBOK 5th.  
 
 1. Specification  
Identification of scope and goals.  
 
2. Conceptualization  
The collection and organization of the 
main domain knowledge.  
3. Formalization  
The representation of knowledge in a 
formal model.  
4. Implementation  
Codifying into a formal ontology 
language.  
5. Evaluation  
Evaluating with some design criteria.  
 
dgdx  
 
 
 
 
 
ddd 
 
 
ndndndndnnd  
 Why the ontology is being built and who 
its users are, are justifi ed. 
An ontology editor tool : Protégé -
OWL , will  be executed.  
Criteria –based evaluation, will be  
proposed . 
 A formal model (formal ontology), 
will be defined.  A glossary of concepts, Taxonomy and 
UML class diagram, will be drawn up . 
 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424 421 Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Conceptual model of HR -Ontology . 
• Formalization: i n this step, t he proposed conceptual model is transformed into a formalized model. Thus , axioms 
are required to define the semantics of concepts and their relationships; since the formal axiom ensures a declarative 
specification for the definitions of and constraints on the concepts and their relations [18 ]. Such specification is 
defined  by a knowledge representation language (descrip tive logic ) such as SHOIN logic [19 ]. The following are 
some examples of axioms defined for HR -Ontology (shown in Fig. 5 ). 
 
Axioms used to describe classes of the HR -Ontology  
Authority  ⊆T(∃ID. Integer)  ∩ (∃ Name. String)  ∩ (∃ Description. String) ∩ (∃ Level. String) ∩ ( ≥1 Depend To. Organization)  
Role ⊆T (∃ ID. Integer)  ∩ (∃ Name. String)  ∩ (∃ Description. String) ∩( ≥1 (Consult ∩ Produce). Artifact)  
Axioms used to describe r elations among c lasses  
Tools ⊆ Tools& Techniques  / Techniques ⊆ Tools& Techniques  / Tools ∩ Techniques   ⊥ 
(Person ∩ ∃Play Role. Role ) ∩ (Role ∩ ∃Require. Competency)            (Person  ∩ ∃Has Competency. Competency ) 
Axioms used to describe instances  
Techniques= {Networking, Expert judgment, Pre -assignment, Acquisition, Virtual team, Training, Team building strategy, Ground rules,  
Colocation, Recognition &Rewards, Conflicts resolution methods}  
Interpersonal skills= {Leadership, Influencing, Team building, Motiv ation, Communication, Decision making, Negotiation, Trust building,  
Conflict management, Coaching, Political and cultural awareness}  
Axioms used to describe properties  
Has-Responsibility− ⊑ Responsibility -Of 
Has_Authority_ Level  ⊑Has_ Authorit y 
Fig. 5. Axioms of HR -Ontology.   

422 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424
6 Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 
• Implementation:  the formalized knowledge acquired in step3 was converted into Protégé editor tool which is frame -
based  representation and generates the code OWL (Ontology Web Language) which can be used in . In our case,  
HR-Ontology was coded using Protégé 5.5 that support creating OWL ontology.  The first sub -step is to model the 
hierarchy of the ontology's concepts and their relations hips as shown in Fig. 6 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Fig. 6. Protégé screenshots of HR-Ontology  Graph  using Onto Graf  plug-in. 
The next step is to present the properties (relationships),  its characteristics (functional, inverse, disjoint, etc) and their 
restrictions. Fig. 7 presents  the des cription of Project _Manager sub class where object property ( i.e. Has_ 
Authority_L evel), universal restriction (Only) and existential restriction (Some) are defined.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7.  Protégé screenshots of Project_ Manger . 
The Role class has five sub classes ( Fig. 6 ); instances of each role are related to the instances of Artifact classthrough 
two properties “Consult” and “Produce”. Further, the activity class has a direct property with Role class using “perform”. Also, Tools_&_t echniques cla ss has two sub -properties  “Need_The_Use_Of_Tool” and  
 

 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424 423 Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 7 
“Need_The_Use_Of_ Technique” with Role class.  Fig.8 describe s these properties related to Project M anager in order 
to perform Plan_HR_ Activity.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Relation between Project manager with artifact, activity, and Tools &Techniques classes.  
• Evaluation: the  evaluation is a crucial step to determine ontology’s reliab ility in a specific domain. HR -Ontology 
is evaluated through criteria –based evaluation approach. Three core criteria are selected which match with our 
objective  as shown in Table 1 . 
            Table 1. The Evalua tion criteria of HR -Ontology . 
Criteria  Definition  Measure  
Completeness  How the HR domain is appropriately covered (al l HRs 
attributes in the context of PMBOK are identified) . Number of terms determined by experts which are 
not included within HR -Ontology (coverage).    
Adaptability  How HR -Ontology can be easy used in other context s 
by allowing it to be extend ed and specialized . Number of cases that can be determined by it  with 
regard to different project types, sizes, etc.  
Effectiveness  Does the ontology improve managing HRs by 
PMBOK.  Measuring project effectiveness (with and withou t 
HR-Ontology in the context of PMBOK).  
5. Conclusion and Perspectives  
The main purpose of HR -Ontology is two -fold. First, this ontology fills the knowledge gap of HRM in the context 
of PMBOK by providing a formal and shared vocabulary about concepts related to specific process . For achieving this 
objective, HR -Ontology provides a knowledge base, offer possibility to query each  role according  to their 
competencies, authority etc, and to query each process according to  the assigned role, the necessary T&T and the 
needed artifacts . Second, the proposed ontology can be exploited as a reliable tool to develop decision support systems 
that enhances managing HRs . Further, this  study involves several perspectives that can be investigated:  
• As the evaluation step based on criteria –based evaluation  approach  which implies the calculation of criteria 
measures like project effectiveness, the proposed ontology can be used as a tool to provide a consistent formula 
orchestrating ontology features.  
• As OWL is enabling to infer and assert new instances, the rule -based reasoning such as open -source DL reasoner 
FaCT++, will be used to extend the reasoning abilities of HR -Ontology.   

424 Wiem Zaouga  et al. / Procedia Computer Science 151 (2019) 417–424
8 Wiem Zaouga et al./ Procedia Computer Science  00 (2018) 000 –000 
References  
[1] Jack-Ide, Izibeloko Omi, Leana R. Uys, and Lyn E. Middleton. (2013) “Mental health care policy environment in Rivers State: experi ences of   
      mental health nurses providing mental health care services in neuro -psychiatric hospital, Port  Harcourt, Nigeria.”International journal of      
mental health systems  7(1): 8. 
[2] Strohmeier, Stefan, and Franca Piazza. (2015) “Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Human Resource Management —A Conceptual  
Exploration.”  Intelligent Techniques in Enginee ring Management. Springer, Cham, 149 -172. 
[3] Navimipour, Nima Jafari, et al. (2015)“Expert Cloud: A Cloud -based framework to share the knowledge and skills of human 
resources.”  Computers in Human Behavior  46:57 -74. 
[4] Sheeba, T., Reshmy Krishnan, and M. Justin Bernard. (2012) “An ontology in project management knowledge domain.”  International Journal 
of Computer Applications  56 (5). 
[5] Projec t Management Institute. (2013) “ A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, 5thedition. ” Pennsylvania, USA: Project 
Management Institute, Inc.  
[6] Elhameed, Ahmed Taha Abd. (2017) “Analyzing the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Through Theoretical Lenses: A      
Study to Enhance the PMBOK Through the Project Management Theories.”  
[7] Gruber, Thomas R. (1995) “Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing?.”  International journal of human -
computer studies  43(5-6): 907 -928.  
[8] Mochól, Malgorzata, Radoslaw Oldakowski and Ralf Heese. (2004) “Ontology base d Recruitment Process.” GI Jahrestagung . 
[9] Gómez -Pérez, Asunción, Jaime Ramírez, and Boris Villazón -Terrazas. (2007) “An ontology for modelling human resources management       
based on standards.”  International Conference on Knowledge -Based and Intellig ent Information and Engineering Systems. Springer, Berlin,        
Heidelberg.   
[10] Ma, Hui, Sven Hartmann, and PanraweeVechsamutvaree. (2018 ) “Towards FCA -facilitated Ontology -supported Recruitment Systems.”  
Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems Architectures  13: 182 -189. 
[11] Strohmeier, Stefan, and Friedrich R öhrs. (2017)  “Conceptual modeling in human resource management: A design research approach. ” AIS 
Transactions on Human -Computer Interaction  9(1) : 34-58. 
[12] Paredes -Valverde, Ma rio Andrés, et al. (2018) “An ontology -based approach with which to assign human resources to software projects.”  
Science of Computer Programming  156: 90-103. 
[13] Schmidt, Andreas, and Christine Kunzmann. (2007) “Sustainable competency -oriented human reso urce development with ontology -based         
competency catalogs.”  Expanding the Knowledge Economy: Issues, Applications, Case Studies. Proceedings of E -Challenges.  
[14] Bodea, Constanţa -Nicoleta, and Maria -IulianaDascălu . (2010)“ Modeling Project Management  Competences: An Ontology -Based Solution  for 
Competency -Based Learning. ” Technology Enhanced Learning. Quality of Teaching and Educational Reform. Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg,503 -509. 
[15] Miranda, Sergio, et al. (2017)“An ontology -based model for competence management.”  Data & Knowledge Engineering  107:51 -66. 
[16] Fernández -López, Mariano. (1999) “Overview of methodologies for building ontologies.”  
[17] Corcho, Oscar, Mariano Fernández -López, and Asunción Gómez -Pérez. (2003) “Methodologies, tools and languages for building ontologies. 
Where is their meeting point?.”  Data & knowledge engineering  46(1): 41-64. 
[18] Guo, Brian HW, and Yang Miang Goh. (2017) “Ontology for design of active fall protection systems.”  Automation in Construction  82: 138 - 
         153. 
[19] Sirin, Evren, and Bijan Parsia . (2006 ) “Pellet system description.”  2006 International Workshop on Description Logics DL’06 . 
 
