88
Copyright © 2014, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Chapter  4
Transformation of Platform-
Independent Model into 
Platform-Specific Model in 
Model-Driven Architecture
ABSTRACT
The Model-Driven Architecture approach to software development uses transformation models for 
transforming Platform-Independent Models (PIM) into Platform-Specific Models (PSM) as its core 
software development strategy. The Model-Driven Architecture (MDA) approach and corresponding 
standards of the software development based on models have been initiated by the Object Management 
Group. In this chapter, the authors analyze the basic models of MDA (i.e., Computational Independent 
Model [CIM], PIM, and PSM) using a suitable example and formalize the model transformations for 
transforming PIM into PSM. These transformations have been illustrated through the generation of a 
Relational Model, an Enterprise Java Bean (EJB) Model, and a Web Model from PIM for the example 
under consideration, using UML profile, and keeping in mind the property of reusability of models in 
MDA transformations. The focus has been on the specification and formalization of rules needed to get 
the Relational PSM, EJB PSM, and Web PSM from PIM. A transformation tool, whose functionality 
of transformation of PIM into Relational PSM, EJB PSM, and Web PSM, is illustrated in this chapter.Yashwant Singh
Jaypee University of Information Technology Waknaghat, India
Manu Sood
Himachal Pradesh University Shimla, India
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-4667-4.ch004
89Transformation of Platform-Independent Model into Platform-Specific Model
INTRODUCTION
As software applications become more com -
plicated day by day, it is essential to model the 
corresponding software artifacts in different 
phases so as to make the communication among 
the stake holders including users and developers 
as effective as possible. Hence, Model Driven 
Architecture (MDA) as software development 
strategy has an important role to play in the soft -
ware development of most of the applications that 
are constructed for a) processing huge amounts of 
enterprise-wide data stored in database systems, 
b) frequent retrieval of the data from database 
systems, c) manipulation of the data in database 
systems; and d) interaction of the end user with the 
enterprise applications. For handling these huge 
and complex databases, the Relational Database 
Management System (RDBMS) is the dominant 
technology. In fact software professionals are 
designing, implementing and/or maintaining 
hybrid systems, in which application layer is 
implemented using object oriented languages and 
database layer is implemented using RDBMS. In 
order to manage the complexity of these hybrid 
and logically complex systems, various model -
ing techniques are being used. But modeling the 
whole system in a logically consistent manner is 
still an area under development and poses chal -
lenges to software developers because there are no 
universal modeling standards for object oriented 
languages in conjunction with RDBMS (Sousa 
& Garlan 1999).
MDA approach of software development un -
der Model Driven Development helps producing 
three models: 1) Computation Independent Model 
(CIM), which specifies the models for domain 
mostly representing requirements of the system, 
2) Platform Independent Model (PIM), which 
specifies the models for abstract concepts of the 
system and excludes platform specific details 
and, 3) Platform Specific Model (PSM), which 
specifies and models how the functionality in a PIM is brought to reality on a specific computing 
platform, with a high level of abstraction.
MDA also supports the transformations from 
CIM to PIM and from PIM to PSM. Transforma -
tion of PIM to PSM includes specifying the rules 
to transform a PIM into: 
1.  An application layer model to be imple -
mented using object oriented languages, 
2.  A database layer model, to be implemented 
using RDBMS, and 
3.  An interaction between application layer and 
database layer is also implemented by object 
oriented languages like JAVA; all as parts 
of PSM (Kurtev, & Van Den Berg 2003). 
RDBMS plays an important role in enterprise 
software applications since the data and business 
information are processed and manipulated at 
database level. In accordance with application 
layer rules all the database operations are imple -
mented and managed with the help of packages, 
procedures, triggers and functions. Modeling 
these operations using model driven develop -
ment approach improves reusability, portability, 
understandability and maintenance of the database 
system (Bowers, & Delcambre 2002). At present 
these benefits are being achieved using latest UML 
standards for documenting the dynamic aspects of 
the systems. An EJB Model plays important role 
in enterprise software applications which include 
storing the data into RDBMS, retrieving the data 
from database and manipulating the data in the 
database. EJB Model facilitates all these above 
transaction in secured, persistent and reliable man -
ner through messaging and objects management 
pooling. Web component of enterprise applica -
tions are defined in Web model, which includes 
interaction of end user with enterprise application 
software developed in object oriented languages.
As such, developing software is a very expen -
sive process and its reuse on application level is 
all the more difficult. But this reuse is possible 
by the vision provided by MDA while describing 
24 more pages are available in the full version of this document, which may 
be purchased using the "Add to Cart" button on the publisher's webpage: 
www.igi-global.com/chapter/transformation-of-platform-independent-model- 
into-platform-specific-model-in-model-driven-architecture/96615 
 
 
Related Content
Meta-Modeling for Situational Analysis and Design Methods
Inge van de Weerd and Sjaak Brinkkemper (2009). Handbook of Research on Modern Systems Analysis
and Design Technologies and Applications (pp. 35-54).
www.irma-international.org/chapter/meta-modeling-situational-analysis-design/21060/
From Knowledge Management to Knowledge Governance: A System-Centred Methodology for
Designing Indigenous Knowledge Management System
Tariq Zaman, Alvin W. Yeo and Narayanan Kulathuramaiyer (2015). Human Factors in Software
Development and Design (pp. 237-248).
www.irma-international.org/chapter/from-knowledge-management-to-knowledge-
governance/117304/
The Role Of Learners' Academic Background On E-Learning: An Empirical Study On The Use
Of Discussion Forum
Kevin K.W. Ho (2014). International Journal of Systems and Service-Oriented Engineering (pp. 51-64).
www.irma-international.org/article/the-role-of-learners-academic-background-on-e-
learning/119659/
How to Create a Credible Software Engineering Bachelor's Program: Navigating the Waters of
Program Development
Stephen Frezza (2009). Software Engineering: Effective Teaching and Learning Approaches and Practices
(pp. 298-325).
www.irma-international.org/chapter/create-credible-software-engineering-bachelor/29605/
A Constructive Approach for Conceptual Database Design
Elvira Locuratolo (2013). Software Development Techniques for Constructive Information Systems Design
(pp. 38-56).
www.irma-international.org/chapter/constructive-approach-conceptual-database-design/75739/
