Keshav Jindal  et a. International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 3, September  2016 , pp. 1 06-111 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 106-  A Multi Agent Structural Design For 
Production Scheduling Using 
Distributed Case Based Reasoning   
Keshav  Jindal1, Dr. Ripuranjan Sinha2, Dr. S. Srinivasan3 
1Research Scholar, Suresh Gyan Vihar University Jaipur  
2Profes sor & Associate  Dean , Suresh Gyan Vihar University Jaipur  
3Professor & Head, P.D.M Engineering College, Bhadurgarh, Haryana  
 
Abstract - In these days, the production system of particular items mu st deal with globalization, proliferating 
product variety, organizational barriers, and quick information sharing. Consequently, appropriate tools are 
needed to efficient support supply chain management. We believe that multi -agents are good candidates to 
overcome these challenges. In this research work, we propose MAS based Decision support system (DSS) which 
is a Multi -Agent System (MAS) to run the production activities efficiently. This research work is totally focused 
on the problem of designing of the Decision support system with aiming of running the production activities 
effortlessly. Such system is a well -known indication of coordination difficulty in conservative production system.  
Keywords -DSS, DCBR,  MAS, CBR
I. INTRODUCTION  
In Artificial Intelligence, there exist multiple 
technologies and mechanisms that can be utilized to 
implement the efficient communication and ordination 
between various entities. The intelligent agent is one of 
the emerging fields of AI. The intelligent a gent is 
automatic; cooperative and own knowledge base. The 
groups of the intelligent agents build the multi -agent 
system.  
The MAS technology guarantees proper communication, 
coordination and information flow among a mixture of 
functions in the DSS. The MAS based Decision Support 
System is incorporated with a model management system 
which includes Case Based reasoning (CBR), D ata 
Mining Systems and several mathematical models. This 
system will minimize the causes of the decision to a great 
extent. The DSS processes recognize the    
organization goals, their objectives, outlining policies, 
strategies and controls for its effectiv eness and well -
organized implementations. The DSS should be 
energized to congregate any newfangled challenges from  
numerous instructions including suppliers, customers and 
supplementary exterior and interior factors. For this 
purpose, the strong modeling technologies are required to 
maintain the complexity involved in DSS. Also business 
changes fast, collaboration and coordination are vital in 
DSS, the combination of SOA and MAS is the perfect 
solution for the organization to meet its objective. The 
Decisi on support system consists multiple entities for 
managing the customer requirements and fulfilling the 
organization goals. As simple view, the DSS may be 
considered following elements as given below:  
• Fundamental elements  
These elements define the overall basic configuration for 
the completing the Decision support operations. There 
are mainly emphasized on the productions and transport 
decisions.  
• Strategic elements  These elements manipulate the decisions involved in 
whole Decision support activities such as information 
flow, inventory control, and demand forecasting and 
product delivery.  
II. REVIEW OF MULTI AGENT BASED ON 
DSS 
Collinson PO  (1997) proposed Health Intelligence 
System is a straight included decision support system 
(DSS) considered to get together the necessities designed 
for intelligent real time scientific information managing 
in important checkup  surroundings plus establishment for 
the expansion of the subsequently propagation of 
intellectual health mechanism. Clinical HIS is an object 
oriented structure developed in C++ to execute under 
Microsoft Windows as an origin intelligent agent [8].  
Mauric e E. Cohen (2002) presents an achievement of 
neural networks in analysis depends not single on 
knowledge method and system organization except also 
on information superiority. If inadequate data are 
obtainable, additional data should be integrated. In this  
effort, expert resulting meta information complement a 
hierarchy of neural networks so as to jointly act as an 
intellectual agent. [9].  
Balter  J (2002) in this article, the writer presents a MAS 
structure for data mining. This appliance, foundation on a 
network line, presents a set of functionalities permitting 
operating several cases and more than thousands of 
neurological examinations amass in  a health check 
database. The plan is to extort health data using data 
mining algorithms as well as to provide an information 
foundation with relevant data. The multi agent policy 
gives the opportunity to deal out the information 
managing procedure involvi ng quite a lot of independent 
things. This structure offer a corresponding with flexible 
information handling.[10]  
Zaid Hassan (2002) proposed as a container for an 
intellectual agent base structure for information detection 
in a dispersed healthiness care  surroundings containing 
several assorted healthcare information warehouse. 
Keshav Jindal  et a. International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 3, September  2016 , pp. 1 06-111 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 107-  Information arbitrates information modernism, 
particularly from several assorted information 
possessions, is a monotonous procedure as well as 
imposes important prepared restrictio ns on end 
consumers. We exhibit that independent, susceptible plus 
anxious intelligent agents nearby an occurrence to 
manufacture end -user leaning, enclosed, significance 
extra decision support scheduling services for healthcare 
proficient’s, manage as wel l as strategy manufacturer, 
without the required for a priori methodological 
information. While effectual healthcare is stranded in 
good message, knowledge allocation, continuous 
knowledge and energetic events, we utilize intelligent 
agents to execute an Agent based Data Mining Info 
arrangement that provide a collection of healthcare 
oriented decision support scheduling services.[11].  
Okba Kazar (2004) presents an The medicine domain is 
an enormous surroundings differentiate by its communal 
plus disseminate d decisional feature, along with its 
organization of mind, necessitating a announcement and 
a composite organization of the a range of scientific 
shapes of orientation among the various medical 
departments, doctors and patients. The introduction of 
multi -agents system into the medical fields facilitates the 
management of the decisions and the actions, and ensures 
the communication and coordination by reducing the 
errors of diagnosis and treatment, and by improving time 
required to seek the medical resources , and other medical 
departments. The purpose of this article is to recommend 
a multi -agents system (M.A.S), which allocates the 
analysis on three agents. Every agent is a expert 
intelligent in the direction of choose plus corresponding 
through the addition al agents. [12].  
Horacio (2004) presented  a physical condition agent, its 
get better the categorization of brain tumors throughout 
multi agent decision support (MADSS) over a scattered 
system of restricted list. Physical condition Agents 
determination not single expand new example detection 
technique for a distributed categorization along with 
investigation of DNA data, other than as well define a 
technique to evaluate the superiority with usability of a 
new applicant confined list surrounding a situate of new 
suitcases, foundation on a consonance achieve [13].  
Zhou et al. (2013) improved the assurance stage of stock 
assortment contain the expansion of an intelligent 
decision support system called TradeExpert, which help, 
not replaces, collection managers. T radeExpert 
unspecified the position of a imaginary securities 
forecaster competent of analyze stocks, calling promote 
turn, and creation recommendation. It had a information 
pedestal of stock trading proficiency, and a case base of 
precedent occurrence and  outcome of decisions. By 
combine knowledge -based difficulty solve with case -
based reasoning, TradeExpert show forms of intelligent 
performance not up till now experiential in conventional 
decision support systems and specialist scheme. The 
innovation of t his investigates lied in its submission to 
analogical reasoning and knowledge based decision 
manufacture [ 14]. 
Yin et al. (2014) developed a CDSS for prime annoyance 
disarray judgment foundation on rule based and case -
based reasoning in regulate to reprodu ce a annoyance specialist’s thoughts procedure. Initially, the new case 
was appraise by rule -based reasoning, the rules approach 
from annoyance clinical principle; Subsequently, if rule -
based reasoning was incapable to get precise respond, 
case-based reaso ning would find the nearly all 
comparable case in case files based on comparison 
corresponding. In exacting, they defined a comparison 
scheming technique for main annoyance case. The 
concluding results demonstrate that the planned approach 
enhanced the ana lytic correctness noticeably compare to 
the rule -based principal annoyance judgment systems 
[15]. 
Mello et al. (2015) presented a decision support method 
explained by a common decision -making procedure, aid 
by the CBR representation, because ITIL do not 
recommend declaration of occurrence with similarity as 
well as IT surroundings hardly ever found consistency for 
calculation by similarity. Thus, the intent was to make 
possible decision -making plus generate consistency in the 
declaration of occurrence allow ing for calculation by 
similarity. A example build with the structure JColibri 
serve to authenticate the suggestion of this occupation  
[16]. 
III. PROBLEM FACED IN EXISTING MAS 
BASED DSS  
In the process of implementing the DSS, the MAS 
technology builds and creates multiple intelligent agents. 
These intelligent agents are being designed with 
predefined roles and responsibilities. With specific roles 
and responsibilities, these intelligent a gents are being 
directed to achieve their own goals. It is possible in 
single intelligent agent application environment. But in 
case of the multi -agent system, there is a system goal but 
having no global overview. For achieving the system 
goal there must b e coordination between these intelligent 
agents in the multi -agent system.  
Coordination problem  
The problem of coordination in multi -agent systems is of 
critical importance in implementing the DSS phenomena. 
In the DSS system, one type of intelligent age nt is 
stimulating with accomplishment of various objectives. 
In another case, the actions to being performed by one 
agent depend on that action performed by another. Hence 
the failure of one agent to coordinate its outcome with 
others could be major terrib le. If the Demand Agent fails 
to coordinate the forecasting values to the Production 
Agent, the Manufacturer Agent will not capable of 
preparing the production schedule and Inventory Agent 
will not capable of making the decisions regarding the 
inventory co ntrol. There exits numerous reasons for 
facing the difficulties in achieving effective coordination 
in a multi -agent system.  
In regulate to create more knowledgeable decisions; the 
agents have to obtain a vision of the task structures of 
other agents. For  solving the problem of coordination in 
the multi -agent system, multiple coordination models are 
being developed for generating the cooperative 
distributed computing environment in which agents 
interrelate and assist to accomplish their own goals along 
with fulfilling the system goals of the community. In a 
Keshav Jindal  et a. International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 3, September  2016 , pp. 1 06-111 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 108-  cooperative computing environment, the agents have 
typically individual potentials that help in solving the 
entire problem.  
There may be two ways of achieving the coordination 
between these intelligent agents. In the first model, the 
agents are working with collectively motivated or 
collectively interested mode by nature as they are aimed 
to work in such way to achieve a common goal along 
with its predefined roles and responsibilities. This model 
is tota lly oriented on the concept of the cooperation 
between the agent groups. This model is found suitable 
only for the closed connected systems where the agent 
groups are designed with the priori along with interaction 
protocol and the strategy for each agent.  There exists 
another possible model in which the agents are self 
motivated or self interested agents by nature because 
every agent has its individual goals and perform the tasks 
in competition with the other agents for achieving these 
goals. This model is  totally oriented on the concept of the 
competition. The competition may be defined in terms of 
the resource allocation or awareness of convincing tasks.  
This model requires the agents to coordinate their 
specific actions with other agents for the purpose of 
ensuring their consistent behavior. This model is found 
suitable for open systems that allow designing the agents 
for dissimilar entities for different  working status. These 
issues are not specified and known at design phase. For 
achieving the coordination of the activities occurred in 
MAS, and then inconsistency may occur due to the 
occurrence of the multiple activities by different 
intelligent agents a t the same time. There is one of the 
fundamental approaches to crack these conflicts may be 
known as the negotiation. The negotiation may be 
defined as the process of identifying interactions based 
on communication and reasoning concerning about the 
circum stances and intentions of other agents. In MAS 
based DSS, both models are found inefficient in 
implementing the coordination between the various 
activities performed by various intelligent agents during 
achieving common goals. Hence we require some better 
technology for achieving the coordination of DSS 
activities.  
3.2 Incapability of learning  
All the intelligent agents in existing MAS based DSS 
system are incapable of learning from the working 
environment. These agents are not capable of gaining the 
expe rience from the past solving problems during its 
operations. They take the decisions using the rule -based 
reasoning approaches. In the rule -based reasoning 
approaches, there exist the rules for determining the next 
actions to be taken for completing the DS S operation.  
The wastage of the past experience of problem solving is 
main drawback of this approach. This method is not 
capable to exploit the past knowledge of difficulty 
solving. This approach is not looked like the human 
reasoning approach. The human reasoning utilizes the 
past experience of problem solving during past time 
periods. Hence to implement the human decision -taking 
process in the decision activities so the architecture 
should be modified for building the intelligent agent in 
the MAS based D SS system.  
 IV. PROPOSED SYTEM ARCHITECTURE  
In last section we have discussed the problem faced in the 
existing the Multi -agent decision support system. These 
problems formulate the worst force on the performance 
of the decision support system. Such scheme is not able 
of production schedule efficiently. Without removing the 
above difficulty, the DSS system will be not capable of 
fulfilling the customer requirements timely with 
achieving the organization goals. There may be following 
solutions of these problems given below:  
In our Proposed System Architecture case based 
reasoning (CBR) is organized by passing on diverse case 
base to every agent, which is conducted by the 
information association provided by coordinator. 
Managerial arrangement can be defined accord ing to two 
dissimilar methods:  
 
 
 
                   Figure 1. Distributed Case Bases with Agent  
 
 Functional bifurcation by ability, so that 
informatio 4.n from the producer, supplier or the 
distributor is reserved individually, whilst 
forecasting with a k nown seller is shared.  
 Spatial decomposition by data basis or judgment 
point, where a few overlapping of data might be 
happen. Interactions of knowledge’s with 
dissimilar dealer are used to asses a latest 
forecasting. Both organizations are appropriate 
approaches in a production field. Thus, here 
CBR agents as part or causes of information. 
CBR agents are accomplished to correlate with 
each one, they meet the expense of their hold 
decision (retailer and confidence), then, a 
coordinator agent formulate a fin al decision 
based on a weighted determination scheme. 
Now, we want to solve a new case C to be 
solved, the coordinator agent distributes the case 
C to each case based reasoning agent. Every 
agent j calculates its own estimation subsequent 
a case based reas oning (CBR) performance. As 
a consequence, each agent sends its individual 
result back to the coordinator (e.g., 0 for not 
found the cases and 1 for find the results or 
infirmity samples) and a assurance δ in its 
approximation. Both, approximation as well as δ 

Keshav Jindal  et a. International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 3, September  2016 , pp. 1 06-111 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 109-  is the result of the CBR retrieve and revision 
phases. Examine than in secluded schemes, δ is 
not give but it is in the multi agent system 
(MAS) methods. The δ cost is determined as an 
occupation of the cases mainly likes to C plus 
the percentage amon g positive and negative 
explanation of these nearly all similar cases is 
also taken into description. Every one agent 
pursues the same retrieve and reuse approach, 
but they use different information.  
The coordinator agent finds the answer to the case based  
on the explanations of the dissimilar agents. For that 
reason, the coordinator keeps a weight w j relating to the 
consistency on every agent j. The weights have been 
entered by the customers or learned by the tool. Using agent weights and assurance in the forecasting, the 
coordinator agent brings together all the confirmation in 
relation to optimistic confirmation (v+ ) and 
unenthusiastic cases (v−).  
V. PROPOSED CBR FRAMEWORK  
This part presents an explanation of our proposed CBR 
system. The structural design of  this scheme is shown in 
Figure 2. It has many sections. These are: Case source 
training module, case base ontology, case retrieval 
engine, case query parser, and human interface modules. 
The next sections describe the architecture of the 
proposed framewor k for details.  
 
Figure 2 Working of Proposed CBR Framework
Case source training module  
This section organized the PIR (Production Information 
Record) raw information to a case base configuration as 
well as contented. It composed the production’s 
characteristics associated to a production system 
commencing distributed PIR systems and accumula ted in 
an Operational Data Store. After that, this information 
was cleaned, in addition to consistent. Features weights 
were deliberated using mechanism knowledge 
algorithms. In conclusion, the prearranged case base was 
fuzzified in a relational database.  
Case -base ontology population  
We have created a fuzzy database for the proposed EER 
(Extended Entity -Relationship) model and filled it with 
different cases of production system. These data have 
been collected from the Production department of 20 
products in Durge Motors . This record is the basis for 
populating our proposed case base ontology.   
Case query parser module  
In this module production manager enters the new 
product explanation in the query form; this structures the 
new case exclusive of a solution . Subsequently, the query 
is break or converts in the form of sub query and coded 
with the similar approaches used for the case base 
ontology to assist similarity and planning. The new 
difficulty organization is altered into the fuzzy case base 
ontology ex pressions by several strategies; then, the 
semantic query is throwing to the Case Retrieval Engine 
to calculate the similarity among the query notions and 
the notions of the innovative semantic query difficulty.  
Case retrieval engine module  
In case -base o ntology, the cases are exhibit as idea 
instances and their features as associations as well as 
belongings. The case retrieval algorithm exploit the 
organization with contented of the ontology to examine 

Keshav Jindal  et a. International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 3, September  2016 , pp. 1 06-111 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 110-  the semantic comparison between the features and 
consequently for the cases.  
VI. CONCLUSION  
Distributed  Case Based Reasoning (DCBR) is an 
imperative method in artificial intelligence, which 
erstwhile functional to different kinds of troubles in a 
extensive range of fields. Selecting case illustration 
formalism is serious for the appropriate procedure of the  
generally CBR system. A distributed case based 
reasoning which mechanism to supporting the expansion 
along with testing of production decision making in a 
distributed surroundings. Now, we are listening carefully 
on innovative user friendly interface cons idered for 
testing production actions. The new methods comprise a 
jointly method for agents under a weighted scheme, 
approaches that hold knowledge for coordination and 
cross validation for spatial and functional MAS 
organizations. We show the use of the t echnique during 
researches conceded out with a production database, and 
we demonstrate how easy it is to evaluate distributed 
methods that keep obviously distributed production 
association. In this approach of Distributed case -based 
reasoning, the multi -agent system becomes more 
powerful for managing the decision support activities. 
With the help of the case -based reasoning, the production 
managers are capable of deriving the most efficient 
decisions instead of using rule -based reasoning approach.  
This appr oach does not allow propagating the past errors 
made in the past DSS decisions at various levels. The 
existing MAS based DSS system has ignored the role of 
the coordinator agent. This entity plays very important 
roles in the modern complex distributed deci sion support 
system.  With the help of the coordinator agent, the 
proposed MAS based DSS have implemented the roles 
and responsibility of the decision support activities for 
managing and coordinating the DSS activities. The 
proposed system can reduce the co ordination problem 
more efficient manner. The usage of the distributed case 
base enables the intelligent agent to access the cases 
stored at different locations. It makes the proposed 
system to work in distributed mode.  
VII. REFERENCES  
[1]. P. V. Petrov and A. D. St oyen, "An intelligent -agent 
based decision support system for a complex 
command and control application,"  Proceedings 
Sixth IEEE International Conference on Engineering 
of Complex Computer Systems. ICECCS, pp. 94 -
104, Tokyo, 2000.  
[2]. Zhou zhi, Jinliang Wei an d Deng Qiangang, "A 
fuzzy multi -objective decision -making method for 
agent -based negotiation,"  International Conference 
on Natural Language Processing and Knowledge 
Engineering, Beijing, China, pp. 203 -208, 2003.  
[3]. Wen -Guo Ai, Jie Sun and Hui Li, "A distribu ted 
marketing decision support system based on multi -
intelligent -agent,"  Proceedings of International 
Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics 
vol.1, pp. 233 -238, 2004.  [4]. P. Becvar, L. Smidl, J. Psutka and M. Pechoueek, 
"An Intelligent Telephony Interface of Multiagent 
Decision Support Systems," in  IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C 
(Applications and Reviews) , vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 553 -
560, July 2007.  
[5]. M. Xu, "Production Scheduling of Agile 
Manufacturing Based on Multi -agents ," Second 
International Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition 
and Modeling , Wuhan, pp. 323 -325, 2009.  
[6]. S. Fournier, A. Ferrarini and E. Tranvouez, "A 
multiagent decision support system for scheduling 
repair - application to socio -technical 
organizations,"  2010 Fourth International 
Conference on Research Challenges in Information 
Science (RCIS) , Nice, France, pp. 365 -374, 2010.  
[7]. D. Kalogeropoulos, E.R. Carson and P.D. llinson,” 
Clinical -HINTS: Integrated Intelligent ICU Patient 
Monitoring and Information Managemen t System”, 
US National Library of Medicine National Institutes 
of Health, Stud Health Technol Inform, Vol. 43, pp. 
906-1010, 1997.  
[8]. M. E. Cohen, D. L. Hudson,” Meta Neural Networks 
as Intelligent Agents for Diagnosis”, Neural 
Networks, IJCNN '02. Proceeding s of the 
International Joint, IEEE, Vol. 1, No. 3, Pages 233 – 
238, 2002.  
[9]. J. Balter, A. Labarre -Vila, D. Ziebelin, C. Garbay,” 
A knowledge -driven agent -centred framework for 
data mining in EMG”, US National Library of 
Medicine National Institutes of Health , C R Biol, 
Vol. 325, No. 4, Pages375 -82, 2002.  
[10]. S. Z. H. Zaid, S. S. R. Abidi and S. Manickam,” 
Leveraging Intelligent Agents for Knowledge 
Discovery from Heterogeneous Healthcare Data 
Repositories”, US National Library of Medicine 
National Institutes of H ealth, Vol. 90, Pages 335 -
340, 2002.  
[11]. O. Kazar, Z. Sahnoun and L. Frecon,” Multi -agents 
system for medical diagnosis”, International 
Conference on Intelligent System and Knowledge 
Engineering, Vol. 1, pp. 1265 - 1270, 2008.  
[12]. H. Gonzalez -Velez, M. Mier, C. Aru s, B. Celda, S. 
V. Huffel, P. Lewis, A. Peet and M. Robles,” Agent -
Based Distributed Decision Support System for 
Brain Tumour Diagnosis and Prognosis” Applied 
Intelligence, Spring Link, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 191 -
202, June 2009.  
[13]. Nikolaos F. Matsatsinis, Pavlos Delias, 
“Implementing an Agent -based Decision Support 
System for Task Allocation: a Multi -criteria 
Approach ”, pp. 128 -141, 2004.  
[14]. H. Zhou, "Modeling Stock Analysts Decision taking: 
An Intelligent Decision Support System,"  14th ACIS 
Keshav Jindal  et a. International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 3, September  2016 , pp. 1 06-111 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 111-  International Conf erence on Software Engineering, 
Artificial Intelligence, Networking and 
Parallel/Distributed Computing , Honolulu, HI, pp. 
29-34, 2013.  
[15]. Z. Yin, L. Min, X. Lu and H. Duan, "A clinical 
decision support system for primary headache 
disorder based on hybrid inte lligent reasoning,"  7th 
International Conference on Biomedical Engineering 
and Informatics , Dalian, pp. 683 -687, 2014.  
[16]. M. Clerc and J. Kennedy, “The particle swarm - 
explosion, stability, and convergence in a 
multidimensional complex space”, IEEE 
Transacti ons on Evolutionary Computation, 6(1) pp 
58.73, 2015.  [17]. Barber, K.S., T. H. Liu, and D. C. Han, “Agent 
oriented design - Technical report: TR98 -UTLIPS -
AGENTS”, the University of Texas at Austin, 1999.  
[18]. Weerdt, M. de, A. ter Mors, and C. Witteveen, 
“Multi -agent  Planning: An introduction to planning 
and coordination” in Handouts of the European 
Agent System Summer School, pp. 1 -32, 2005  
[19]. R. M. A. Mateo, L. F. Cervantes, H. Yang and J. 
Lee, “ Mobile Agents using Data mining for 
Diagnosis Support in Ubiquitous Healt hcare”, Agent 
and Multi -Agent Systems: Technologies and 
Applications Lecture Notes in computer Science, 
Springer link, Vol. 4496, Pages795 -804, 2006.  
 
 
 
