A Multi-Agent System Blockchain for a Smart City
Andr ´e Diogo, Bruno Fernandes, Ant ´onio Silva, Jos ´e Carlos Faria, Jos ´e Neves, and Cesar Analide
Department of Informatics
Centro ALGORITMI, University of Minho
Braga, Portugal
Email: a75505@alunos.uminho.pt, bruno.fmf.8@gmail.com, a73827@alunos.uminho.pt,
a67638@alunos.uminho.pt, jneves@di.uminho.pt, analide@di.uminho.pt
Abstract —In a Smart City context, and speciﬁcally targeting
public collection of sensor data from arbitrary sources by
arbitrary actors, accuracy, reliability and frequency of data
may be highly variable. The Blockchain technology allows the
management of public immutable ledgers that track the activities
of these actors closely and, as such, provides a possible solution
to incentivize and empower good actors (those who supply
accurate, reliable and frequent data). This paper focuses on
mechanisms to provide such incentives, what we call a Proof-
of-Conﬁdence (POC), using a view of these actors as intelligent
agents, capable of autonomous interaction with the Blockchain.
While it is concluded that full security guarantees can not be
provided without additional restrictions at the agents’ behavior
level, our model is used to prove the feasibility of supplying a
gamiﬁed environment for such agents, with optimizable metrics
which favor accurate, reliable and frequent data.
Keywords-blockchain; smart city; sensor data; multi-agent
systems.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Smart Cities introduce novel problems related to the man-
agement of inordinate amounts of sensor data of various types
and origins. From local temperature data to road trafﬁc, the
data may be originated from a multitude of data sources,
distributed through numerous autonomous and communicating
devices, usually referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT).
Such data must be stored adequately as it is fundamental for
the analysis and development of real physical models.
The distributed management of data originated from the
IoT requires a network capable of dealing with changes
in the environment. An architecture comprised of regular
microservices would be a valid solution to this problem,
adapting to changes reactively. It lacks, however, a contextual
view of these changes, meaning that the network will act
on them based directly on differences in data values, and
not on what these differences might mean for the analyzed
environment. Intelligent agents add this contextual awareness,
as well as autonomy and intelligence in the form of problem
solving to achieve greater rewards as result of contributing to
the network’s maintenance. In fact, these agents are capable
of learning, adjusting and optimizing their behaviors in the
presence of incentives. The ecosystem of agents, known as a
Multi-Agent System (MAS), allows further ﬂexibility in com-munication and use of established Multi-Agent development
platforms [1].
In regard to the network itself, Blockchains enjoy desirable
characteristics to organize the collected data due to their
immutable and referential nature. They effectively track all
identities that inscribe data into the Blockchain using units
called as transactions, which couple each identity to the data
it published. A public edited ledger keeps its integrity over
time, as each block in the chain references its previous,
allowing blocks to become increasingly tamper-resistant. How-
ever, Blockchains by themselves do not provide incentives to
produce accurate, reliable and frequent data that can be used,
for example, to produce/optimize machine learning models.
This situation deteriorates even further with the huge amount
of distributed devices with unknown origins and data sources.
This paper aims to describe a new Blockchain model,
whose goal is to enable a gamiﬁed environment for a system
comprised of a multitude of agents. A system where agents
that work towards its intended goal provide good data and
allow the potential to identify malicious ones. Hence, this
paper is structured as follows, viz. Section II will go over
the unique characteristics of the conceived Blockchain, such
as how interactions guarantee no data is lost and how data
is stored in the Blockchain. Section III will describe how
this MAS may interact with the Blockchain, followed by
Section IV which describes the developed scoring system:
how scores are attributed to the data, how this scoring is
calculated and how this scoring achieves the desired goal
of providing an optimized metric for accurate, reliable and
frequent data. Section V will present a case study for this
system in a more restricted environment, denominated Smart-
Hub. Finally, Section VI will present a summarized conclusion
of our ﬁndings, and outline future work on the proposed
system, with special focus on security.
II. T HEBLOCKCHAIN
The proposed Blockchain is very similar, in structure, to
existing cryptocurrency-based public Blockchains. Indeed, it
is based on a Proof-of-Work (POW) scheme [2], with some
key differences (Figure 1):
68 Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems
Figure 1. The block structure.
The unit of transaction is the data collected by an agent
from a speciﬁc source, tagged with a time-stamp and the
agent’s identity;
There is no complex conditional scripting over these
transaction;
The value of a transaction is translated into a score, which
makes up the transaction outputs, as opposed to a coin-
based system;
The cumulative score of an agent is monotonically in-
creasing;
This cumulative score provides a way to gauge the impor-
tance of an agent to the system, as frequently participating
agents accrue higher scoring;
Extracting a median score per transaction provides a way
to gauge the accuracy of an agent, as accurate agents
accrue higher score per transaction.
In the developed Blockchain, a POW schema was chosen
in detriment of other schemes for ensuring investment in
the Blockchain mainly for its simplicity, the adequacy to
potentially resource constrained devices, as well as to avoid
different tiers of agents and further implementation complex-
ity. To interact with the Blockchain, the intelligent agents
are required to have a cryptographically secure identity based
on an asymmetric public and private key-pair. The public
identity is the one which is referenced and tracked by the
Blockchain, with the data supplied by an agent being signedwith its private key, effectively rendering it tamper-proof, as
well as establishing irrevocable authorship. The Blockchain is
made available to these agents and any other application as a
completely stand-alone library.
Advocating for open-source artifacts, all the produced soft-
ware was published, in GitHub, under a MIT License [3].
A. Architecture
The developed Blockchain (Figure 2) considers three main
entities: the agents that participate in building and maintaining
the ledger, identiﬁed as ledger agents; the agents responsible
for supplying ledger agents with processed data, known as
slave agents; and data generating devices, like sensors, which
may supply data to slave agents or directly to ledger ones. A
group of the referred entities, connected between themselves,
constitute what is denominated a Smart-Hub (Figure 2a). On
the other hand, the MAS Blockchain consists of several hubs
and ledger agents that opted to live outside speciﬁc hubs
(Figure 2b). Each hub may be applied to distinct domains such
as government management, road safety and weather forecast,
among many others.
B. Data Integrity
To ensure that transactions are not lost, the agent that gener-
ates them must keep track of which transactions it issued and
are not yet present in a committed block. To ensure that such
transactions will populate a block, there must be a periodic
diffusion of the transactions that are not yet committed. No
restrictions are applied as to the time that transactions are
issued, and score is not deducted at any point from a given
identiﬁed agent. Due to this lack of restrictions over the
validity of gathered data, and in contrast to cryptocurrency-
based schemes [2] [4], a transaction is never invalidated (as
would be the case for insufﬁcient funds or cancellation). As
long as the agent stores its transactions, data gathered is
guaranteed to never be lost and will eventually be recorded
in the Blockchain later in time.
C. Data Storage
Only the ledger agents are required to keep a copy of the
ledger, with slave ones being just responsible for gathering
data. The data representation is left completely conﬁgurable,
provided that there is a clear distinction between each type of
data. The size of such data must be calculable, as the block
size is ﬁxed (as in [2]).
Two basic assumptions are key for data storage: the ﬁrst
is that data exists at a point in time and the second is that
it may be tied to a geographical location. As such, all data
is required to be tagged by the agent through a hardware
clock with the time at which that data was gathered, either by
the sensor or the agent’s clock. For geographically signiﬁcant
data, geographic coordinates can be supplied to increase data
accuracy, which will impact later calculations.
69 Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems
Figure 2. The Blockchain Architecture: (a) a Smart-Hub comprising Ledger and Slave agents; and (b) the MAS Blockchain comprising multi Smart-Hubs
and Ledger Agents.
III. A GENT INTERACTION
This section describes the agents’ main interactions with
the Blockchain (Figure 3), which are synthesized by two
main behaviors: block mining and data capture. Two addi-
tional behaviors, related to data synchronization, are brieﬂy
described. It is worth noting that the Blockchain is completely
independent and unaware of the agent’s platform.
A. Start-up
Initially, synchronization with other running agents of the
Blockchain is made through sequential transfer starting from
the latest committed block of the starting agent. The mecha-
nism for peer exchange is left up to the implementation. The
agent then begins executing the succeeding behaviors.
B. Mining
To reduce computational load, agents will mine a block only
once one is full interleaved with data capture into subsequent
blocks. Stricter synchronization must be enforced to avoid long
temporary forks, which would result in both large overhead
in computation, for block validation, as well as network
overhead, transmitting full blocks. Blocks are considered full
only when they are populated with enough transactions as to
achieve either a ﬁxed amount of ceiling or ﬁll the maximum
allocated block size. A ﬁxed amount of transactions help avoid
extended delays in generating blocks when only very small
transactions are added.
C. Data Capture
Each agent manages its own sources of data, originating in
its slave devices, such as electronic sensors or other agents, as
well as timings and priorities given to these sources in order to
maximize their score. For this main behaviour, through which
transactions are generated, an agent chooses one of these pre-
conﬁgured sources to extract data and generate a transaction.This transaction is inserted to the latest block in construction
and must be propagated to other agents with support from
its underlying agent platform. These sources of data may be
any known Application Programming Interface (API) which
allows its masters to poll and extract this data.
D. Synchronization
The inherent problem of consensus in such a distributed
system is still present. Therefore, mechanisms similar to those
in established cryptocurrencies must be performed by the
agents. These are generalized in a synchronization behavior
where agents compare and exchange transactions to record
in the Blockchain, as well as block headers and full blocks
when necessary. This behavior has to be executed concurrently
with data capture, as synchronization of known transactions
is important to reduce overall computational load. Moreover,
block headers are propagated between agents when mining
results in a nonce that fulﬁlls the difﬁculty requirements
of the block. When tight synchronization of transactions is
ensured, only the block header needs to be propagated, as the
same already validated transactions will be present in each
individual agent’s current block and only the nonce and time-
stamp differ in the header.
IV. S CORING - A P ROOF -OF-CONFIDENCE METRIC
Work has been done in the context of public Blockchains
to establish trust between cooperating peers which hold
wallets and ledgers in more traditional cryptocurrency-based
Blockchains. Such is the case of the NEM Blockchain [4]
which relies on a Proof-of-Importance scheme (POI) and
maintains peer reputations through the use of the Eigentrust++
[5] algorithm. This approach, however, focuses more on trust
between peers based on their interactions than the values they
supply in the form of transactions. The scoring approach taken
for this paper is thus similar to the POI scheme, as it attributes
70 Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems
Figure 3. Activity diagram describing the agents’ life cycle.
increasing importance to certain agents, but also distributing
block mining equitably to all participating agents.
Scoring is the aforementioned optimizable metric and it is
calculated by taking into consideration relative measurements.
An agent’s goal is to maximize this score, enabling a gamiﬁed
environment where agents compete for the highest score.
These scores are attributed to the agents that supply the trans-
actions through the block’s special coinbase transaction, and
summed to its aggregated total. As usual in cryptocurrency-
based Blockchains [2], each transaction is recorded such that
it references which transactions were taken into account to
produce the addition to the agent’s outstanding score and the
latest known total score for such agent prior to the new block.
Thus, the main difference between scoring and traditional
mined cryptocurrency comes from the fact that there is no
reliance on a ﬁxed lump-sum [2], but instead the coinbase is
incrementally constructed, adding scores to each agent that
adds transactions to the block.
A. Scoring Formula
The scoring is calculated via relative measurements, namely
ratios between data values and time-stamps, possibly restricted
to a conﬁgurable geographic radius (for geographically tagged
data). In order to ascribe higher scores to data displaying
desirable traits such as accuracy, reliability and frequency, a
contract was established.1) Contract:
Any data that populates the Blockchain must, at least,
allow for comparison against a previous transaction of
the same type. As such, data must be identiﬁable by
type or category (such as temperature, humidity or trafﬁc
data) and this category must allow some type of partial
ordering;
The comparison must result in a ratio of the previous
value and the current value. These values depend on the
type of data being measured.
2) Relative Calculations: Due to the nature of a POW
metric, and the fact we consider arbitrary agents, the presence
of monotonic clocks across all possible agents can not be
guaranteed and, so, it is possible to commit data that is older
than one would expect. As such, the insertion of data that is
older than some existing data of the same category in a small
geographical radius is likely to happen. The approach taken in
this paper to rank data is one that is simple, although requiring
complex querying over the Blockchain. Indeed, it comes from
the observation that physical data tends toward homogeneity
for reduced time-frames: taking, for example, temperature
readings, it is highly probable that within a small region
and considering a time-frame of a few seconds, temperature
readings will not differ signiﬁcantly. This assumption allows
the protocol used for synchronization between peers to
71 Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems
avoid additional resource usage and complexity accrued by
employing time synchronization approaches, such as NEM’s
Blockchain [4] time synchronization protocol, based on
[6] a more classic approach taking from [7]. In addition,
instead of maintaining a complex scoring system, such as
PageRank-based algorithms [8]), a simple short-term memory
formula was developed to ease resource usage in score
attribution.
3) Formula: The formula to calculate the score of a given
transaction is broken into three different components, and is
predicated on a comparison between the transaction to be
added, noted with subscript aand the transaction closest in
time to it (as measured by the time-stamp) present in the
Blockchain or in the currently constructed block, of the same
type, noted with subscript c:
The ﬁrst component extracts a relative measurement
between the two time-stamps, noted as t:
t=jtc taj
tc(1)
The second component extracts a relative measurement
between the values present in the data, noted v, for each
valueiorjin the set of VcandVavalues present in
each:
v=jPvci PvajjPvci;i2Vc;j2Va (2)
The ﬁnal component is a small additive base component,
which guarantees a base incentive to provide data, noted
asbase .
It must be noted that for geographically tagged data, a
conﬁgurable and reasonable radius must also be deﬁned, in
which the transaction closest in time must be restricted to, in
relation to the transaction to be added. These three components
are then composed in order to emphasize and prioritize either
thet, such that frequency and reliability of the data is
valued more highly; the v, such that stricter homogeneity of
values are valued more highly; and the base component, which
incentives data collection regardless of quality and which, as
to not overshadow the previous components, should be strictly
smaller, preferably by, at least, one order of magnitude.
B. Data Guarantees
It should be stressed out that although no guarantees are
given that malicious agents are barred from cluttering the
Blockchain with arbitrary data, such agents would be easily
ﬂagged due to their naturally low scoring, either through
their cumulative score or their median score per transaction.
Since this scoring system effectively maintains a short term
memory, as it always compares transaction data to that which
is closest in time to it, although abnormal events (considering
for example a ﬁre close to a temperature sensor) result in
initially poorly scored readings, subsequent readings will score
higher by being compared to the previous low scoring reading.These four key properties provide what we call a Proof-
of-Conﬁdence (POC) since this Blockchain allows for both
data and agents to be ranked according to some measure of
conﬁdence, in low resource environments.
V. S MART -HUB
A simpliﬁed model of a smart city was used to develop a
prototype implementation of the described system, as well as
develop the main scoring formula, in which ﬁve ﬁxed different
categories of data where considered, all geographically tagged:
Temperature data;
Humidity data;
Luminosity data;
Noise data;
Other data.
A strict categorization approach was followed in which this
data not only follows the previously deﬁned hierarchy, but is
divided into classes according to its type, and in conformance
with the established scoring contract.
A composition formula, developed and used in this case
study, is one that values tovervwith a very small base
component, effectively prioritizing a dense timeline of data.
(tbaset)2vbase v
2+base
divisor(3)
where,
baset= 5; basev= 2; base =1
3; divisor = 50000 (4)
The restriction radius of geographically tagged data consid-
ered for this case study is based on a percentage deviation
lower than 0:1%of the transactions geographical coordinates,
as it centers around a very small scoped region, of the scale
of a factory or warehouse.
The entire system was developed from the ground up to be
able to run on a single Java Virtual Machine (JVM) instance,
enforcing the previously referred separation of the Blockchain
as a library and implementing an agent as an application which
uses this library using the JADE development framework [9].
This agent is designed to integrate with other agents of its
kind to form a MAS and allow for easy conﬁguration of data
sources (conﬁgured via a documented ﬁle whose structure is
not yet stabilized). The inclusion of other data was added for
additional ﬂexibility of the Blockchain, allowing arbitrary data
to be inserted, albeit this data being an order of magnitude
less valuable, by increasing its divisor (4) and bypassing the
delta calculations and contract entirely, effectively supplying
the maximum ratio of one for both deltas. There were no re-
strictions to geographical coordinates of the data for increased
simplicity, though very tight bounds were assumed for the
radius considered for calculations, as previously referred.
A block size of two megabytes was considered, as it was
found that this particular Blockchain requires both tighter
synchronization than the classical ones and a big increase in
computational load in verifying block integrity. This consid-
erably large block size allows for a big bulk of transactions to
72 Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems
be supplied into the Blockchain at a time to compensate for
the extra resource usage due to these characteristics. To pro-
vide long-term storage support, as well as complex querying
capabilities, use of an embedded database management system
was planned.
Throughout the development process, certain characteristics
of the Blockchain were observed and conclusions extrapolated
over certain key aspects, two of them, already mentioned
above:
A. Computational Load
It was observed that the use of the POW scheme, coupled
with the restrictions of these IoT devices, lead towards po-
tentially undesirable computational loads, via uninterrupted
mining and validation of network transmitted blocks, thus the
restriction of mining only to completely full blocks.
Of note as well is the high cost in validating blocks trans-
mitted through the network, due to the need for comparisons
between potentially distant transactions in the chain, in order
to recalculate scores and ensure they are correct. In order to
do so, a multitude of costly queries may have to be run against
the Blockchain, and as such, tighter synchronization is a must.
However, in data scarcity environments, this can prove to slow
down block throughput considerably. The trade-off was made
to ensure less computational load, as such a general purpose
Blockchain lends itself more naturally to long-term analysis,
leaving more urgent applications to be solved by more local
context solutions.
B. Memory Footprint
Having a considerably large block size, as well as having
very few restrictions on the types of data that can potentially be
supported, leaves a memory footprint potentially unacceptable
for the more embedded devices, making the ledger maintaining
agents more adequate to devices in a management role, such
as data aggregating devices.
C. Network Bandwidth
Due to aforementioned large block size, it might be unfeasi-
ble for very restricted devices in terms of network bandwidth
to participate in the Blockchain.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
From the recorded observations, we can concluded that the
conceived Blockchain model is best suited for applications
that are non time-critical, but, instead, favor data management,
storage and long-term analysis. It is also concluded from
the conceived scoring system that the developed Blockchain
is able to provide incentives for agents to supply data that
tends towards accuracy, reliability and frequency. However, no
strong guarantees can be provided in such a public context,
due to the potential presence of malicious agents. We note
an interesting property of our system, which motivates the
focus of future work: as we value frequent and reliable data,
agents and data sources which fail to produce such data can
be identiﬁed and, if necessary, discarded. These thresholdsrequire more deﬁnition and tests. Future work will also focus
on identifying malicious agents, signaling abnormal data, as
well as identifying classes of composition formulas, such as
(3), best suited for prioritization of each desired characteristic
of the data. Thus, the task to ensure truly accurate, trustworthy
data, if so required, is left to the implementation of data
gathering mechanisms used by each agent.
Three further extensions to this Blockchain model are also
proposed in an attempt to close the gap between accuracy
malicious activity:
We propose either the integration of a conﬁgurable alert
system directly in the Blockchain on block committal
or on the agent level, themselves monitoring Blockchain
activity;
A special temporary blacklist transaction could be in-
cluded that references a ﬁxed number of irregular in-
stances of transactions supplied by a given agent, ef-
fectively disallowing these agents to contribute to the
Blockchain for a ﬁxed number of blocks;
A system of captive scoring could also be implemented,
in which transactions by new identities are only commit-
ted to a block after ones’ identity has been recognized to
have produced sufﬁcient scoring.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by COMPETE: POCI-01-
0145-FEDER-007043 and FCT – Fundac ¸ ˜ao para a Ci ˆencia e
Tecnologia within the Project Scope: UID/CEC/00319/2013,
being partially supported by a Portuguese doctoral grant,
SFRH/BD/130125/2017, issued by FCT in Portugal.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Li, T. Logenthiran, and W. Woo, “Intelligent multi-agent system
for smart home energy management,” in IEEE Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA) Bangkok, Thailand , 2015, pp. 1–6, doi:
10.1109/ISGT-Asia.2015.7386985.
[2] “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,” 2008, URL: https:
//bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf [retrieved: October, 2018].
[3] “Prototype Implementation Repository,” 2018, URL: https://github.com/
Seriyin/mas-blockchain-main [retrieved: October, 2018].
[4] “NEM: Technical Reference,” 2018, URL: https://www.nem.io/
wp-content/themes/nem/ﬁles/NEM techRef.pdf [retrieved: October,
2018].
[5] X. Fany, L. Liu, M. Li, and Z. Su, “Eigentrust++: Attack resilient trust
management.” 2012, URL: https://www.cc.gatech.edu/ lingliu/papers/
2012/XinxinFan-EigenTrust++.pdf [retrieved: October, 2018].
[6] S. Scipioni, “Algorithms and Services for Peer-to-Peer Internal Clock
Synchronization,” 2009, phD Thesis URL: https://www.dis.uniroma1.it/
dottoratoii/media/students/documents/thesis scipioni.pdf [retrieved: Oc-
tober, 2018].
[7] L. Lamport and P. M. Melliar-Smith, “Byzantine clock synchronization.”
inThird Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Com-
puting , 1984, pp. 68–74, URL: http://lass.cs.umass.edu/ shenoy/courses/
summer04/readings/Lamport 52byz clock.pdf.
[8] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The PageRank citation
ranking: Bringing order to the web.” 1998, technical report, Stanford
Digital Library, Technologies Project URL: http://ilpubs.stanford.edu:
8090/422/1/1999-66.pdf [retrieved: October, 2018].
[9] K. Chmiel, D. Tomiak, M. Gawinecki, P. Karczmarek, M. Szymczak,
and M. Paprzycki, “Testing the efﬁciency of JADE agent platform,”
inThird International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Comput-
ing/Third International Workshop on Algorithms, Models and Tools for
Parallel Computing on Heterogeneous Networks , 2004, pp. 49–66, doi:
10.1109/ISPDC.2004.49.
73 Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems
