International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014       1 
ISSN 2250 -3153  
www.ijsrp.org  An Analysis on Multi -Agent Based Distributed Data 
Mining System  
R.HEMAMALINI *, Dr.L.JOSEPHINE MARY ** 
 
* Research scholar St.Peter’s University  
** Professor & HOD, MCA Dept. Sri Ram  Engineering College,Veppampet  
 
 
    Abstract - The Distributed Data Mining  (DDM ) is a branch of 
the field of data mining that offers a framework to mine 
distributed data paying careful attention to the distributed data 
and computing resources . Us ually, data -mining systems are 
designed to work on a single dataset. On the other hand wit h the 
growth of networks, data is increasingly dispersed over many 
machines in many different geographical locations.   Also, even 
as most practical data -mining algorithms operate over 
propositional representations  are known as first order learning . In 
existing system, t he concept of knowledge is very important in 
data mining. In order to get the correct knowledge from the data 
mining system, the user must define the objective and specify the 
algorithms and its parameters exactly with minimum effort. If the 
data mining system produces large number of meaningful 
information by using a specialized data mining algorithm like 
association, clustering, decision trees etc., it will take more time 
for the end - users to choose the appropriate knowledge for the 
problem discussed. Even choosing the correct data mining 
algorithm in volves more time for the system . Developing a data 
mining system that uses specialized agents with the ability to 
communicate with multiple information sources, as well as with 
other agents requires a great deal of flexibility.  The main 
objective of this  paper  titled on  “ An Analysis on  Multi -Agent 
Based Distributed Data Mining System “ describe s the  
knowledge integration , Knowledge Integration in Distributed 
Data -Mining and Heterogeneous v s. Homogeneous Data -Mining , 
a literature survey of Multi -Agent Based Distributed Data 
Mining System,  a  Model Of Multi –Agent System Based Data 
Mining ,  the improving DDM performance by combining 
distributed data mining and multi -agent system  and   Data 
Mining using Multiple Agents . 
 
    Index Terms - MAS – Multi  agent System , DDM - Distributed 
Data Mining, DMA – Data Mining Agent  , ILP - Identify Local 
Pattern , KI – Knowledge Integration.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Data -mining or Knowledge Discovery is concerned with 
extracting knowledge from databases and/or knowledge bases  
using machine learning techniques.  The first order learning  is to 
enable s us to explore the aspects of knowledge integration and 
theory refinement which do not appear in propositional systems . 
Software has the response to the problem of using the vast 
amounts of information stored on networked systems. There are 
many types of software agent; however, agents are typically thought of as being 'intelligent' programs which have some 
degree of self -sufficiency. We intend to design an open, flexible 
data-mining agent. A group of these agents will be able to co -
operate to discover knowledge from distributed sources.  
 
    In  DDM , one of the two assumptions is commonly adopted as 
to how data is distributed  across sites: homogeneously 
(horizontally partitioned) and heterogeneously (vertically 
partitioned). Both viewpoints adopt the conceptual idea that the 
data tables at each site are partitions of a single global table. In 
the homogeneous case, the global t able is horizontally partitioned 
.  The tables at each site are subsets of the global table; they have 
exactly the same attributes. In the heterogeneous case the table is 
vertically partitioned, each site contains a collection of columns 
as sites do not ha ve the same attributes . However, each tuple at 
each site is assumed to contain a unique identifier to facilitate 
matching. It is important to stress that the global table viewpoint 
is strictly conceptual. It is not necessarily assumed that such a 
table was  physically realized and partitioned to form the tables at 
each site. The development of data mining algorithms that work 
well under the constraints imposed by distributed datasets has 
received significant attention from the data mining community in 
recent  years. Local computation is done on Improving DDM 
Performance by Combining Distributed Data Mining and Multi -
Agent System.  
 
    The Multi -Agent Learning is a  number of co -operative 
distributed learning systems have been produced. Each agent has 
a data -source and a clustering algorithm. The agents propose 
rules which characterize the data seen and review other agents' 
proposals. Eventually consent about the knowledge extracted 
from the data is reached. Each agent has local knowledge and 
either an inductive or deductive learning algorithm. Agents 
attempt to solve a problem -solving task by either retrieving the 
knowledge required, or by using learning to acquire it. Failures 
result in communication with other agents which are passed sub -
goals, which are then t reated as tasks.  
 
There are three ways learning can occur when data is 
distributed. These relate to when agents communicate with 
respect to the learning process:  
• The first approach gathers the data in one place. The distributed 
database management systems  is used to  provide a single set of 
data to an algorithm is an example of this. The problem with 
such an approach is that it does not make efficient use of the 
resources usually associated with distributed computer networks.  
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014       2 
ISSN 2250 -3153  
www.ijsrp.org  • The second approach is  for agents to exchange information at 
the same time as learning on local data. This is the approach 
taken by and n o revision or integration is needed, as the agents 
are effectively working as a single, tightly coupled, algorithm 
over the entire data. This  restricts the agents to using learning 
algorithms that have been specially modified to work in this way. 
Thus the main disadvantage with this approach is that it does not 
allow the use of  future  learning algorithms.  
• The third approach is for the agents to learn locally, and then to 
share their results, which are then refine  it  and integrate  it  by 
other agents in their own search for data and knowledge. This 
model permits the use of standard algorithms, and also allows 
inter-operation between different algorithms. The main problem 
here is how to integrate the local results.  We are adopting the 
latter approach, as it provides distributed processing together 
with flexibility in taking part in  future algorithms.  
 
 
Why Agents For DDM?  
 
The following are in  the support of using agents in DDM:  
Autonomy of data sources : A DM Agent may be considered as a 
modular extension of data management system to handle the 
access to the underlying source with the given constraints on the 
required self -sufficiency of the sy stem, data model.  
Interactive DDM : Assisting agents may limit the amount of 
human user who supervises and interferences with the running 
data mining process.  
Active Selection of sources and data Gathering : One challenge 
for intelligent DM agents acting in  open distributed data 
environments in which the DM checks the data sites available 
and their content may change at any time. DM agents may be 
applied to select data sources according to the given criteria.  
Scalability of DM to massive distributed data : To reduce 
network and DM application server load ,DM agents may be let 
to transfer the local data sites in a DDM system, which performs 
mining tasks locally.  
Multi -Strategy DDM : For s ome complex application setting  an 
appropriate combination of multiple dat a mining technique may 
be more beneficial than applying one particular technique.DM 
agents learn their action depending on the data retrieved from 
different sites and mining tasks to be done.  
Collaborative DM:  DM agents may operate independently on the 
data they may have gathered at local sites and then combine their 
respective models .DM agents may talk with each other and 
jointly plan a solution for the problem.  
Security and Trust worthiness : Agent based DDM has to 
manage with the problem of ensuring data security and privacy. 
Agent code and data security play a big role in DDM system by 
which Data mining agents may get information even form partial 
integration to a  certain extent and with some probability.  
 
        The following section s describe the relationship between 
theory revision, knowledge integration , Knowledge Integration in 
Distributed Data -Mining and Heterogeneous vs. Homogeneous 
Data -Mining , a literature survey of Multi -Agent Based 
Distributed D ata Mining System,  a  Model Of Multi –Agent 
System Based Data Mining ,  the improving DDM performance by combining distributed data mining and multi -agent system  
and Data Mining using Multiple Agents .  
 
2.1. Knowledge  Integration  
If this approach is adopted, then the local theories have to be 
integrated. It must be remembered that each agent's local results 
are correct for that agent's view of the data[4]. Thus the 
fundamental problem is to compare local theories with 
previously un seen data, i.e. other agent's data. This data is of 
course summarized by the results produced by the other agents. 
Both theory revision and knowledge integration as resources in 
helping to produce a single global result  is taken care off. There 
appear to b e three alternatives:  
 The first approach involves a supervisor agent, in which 
one agent attempts to integrate all the local theories. 
However, this may lead to the transmission of large 
amounts of the original data, in order to test the 
accuracy of the ne w knowledge.  
 The second is a democratic version of the supervisor 
approach, with the agents working as a team to integrate 
their local results.  
 The third approach involve search agent taking other 
agent's theories and integrating them locally. It can be 
seen from this discussion, the knowledge integration is a 
fundamental one in creating a distributed data -mining 
architecture . 
 
2.2. Knowledge Integration in Distributed Data -Mining  
 
Individual agents will produce new knowledge based on 
their discovery goals , and the view of the distributed data. This 
individual knowledge will have to be integrated, so that it 
accounts for all views of the data.  Theory Refinement and 
Knowledge Integration are related techniques. Theory refinement 
involves revising a theory w ith respect to new training examples. 
Knowledge integration involves combining two theories into a 
single unified theory. However, the learning techniques used for 
both are similar, and ILP algorithms in particular appear to make 
little distinction between  revising clauses in response to new 
examples, and combining two sets of clauses and then revising 
them to fit the existing example.  
Our initial decision to use an ILP learning algorithm [5] 
was based on the insight that many ILP algorithms provide 
support  for theory revision and knowledge integration. An agent 
based on such an algorithm could be used to both induce and 
integrate knowledge. However, there is far more to consider than 
simply choosing an appropriate algorithm. Firstly, we must 
consider the na ture of the data and discovery goals given to each 
agent. Then it must  be considered when the agents should co -
operate: either before, during or after learning. Finally, if it is 
decided  that the co -operation should take place after learning, it 
should be decide d how the agents will integrate the set of local 
results in order to reflect a global solution to the data -mining 
goal.  
 
2.3. Heterogeneous vs. Homogeneous Data -Mining  
 
If each agent in the system is associated with a single 
database, then there are  two basic types of interaction to 
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014       3 
ISSN 2250 -3153  
www.ijsrp.org  consider. If each agent has the same discovery goal, and the same 
database scheme, though normally with different values , is 
referred to this as homogeneous data -mining. In this case the 
problem for the agents is to resol ve partial results based on each 
partial view of the whole of the data.  
If each agent has a different database and discovery 
goal, then the agents may use theories found by other agents as 
sub-theories. For example, if one agent learns a definition of 
parent, then a second agent might use this in its definition of 
grandparent . We refer to this as heterogeneous data mining.  
 
3. LITERATURE SURVEY  
 
Data mining , also called knowledge discovery in databases , in 
computer science , is the process of discovering interesting and 
useful patterns and relationships in large volumes of data. The 
field combines tools from statistics  and artificial intelligence  
such as neural networks  and machine learning with database  
management to analyze large digital collections, known as data 
sets[1].  
Distributed data mining  (DDM) is an important research area. 
One of  the approaches suitable for the DDM is to select relevant 
local patterns from the distributed databases. Such patterns, often 
called prototypes, are subsequently merged to create a compact 
representation  of the distributed data  repositories. To assure 
obtaining homogenous prototypes the feature selection  requires 
collaboration of agents [2]. The task of distributed data mining  is 
to extract and integrate kn owledge from different sources. 
Solving such tasks requires a special approach and tools, 
different from those applied to learning from data located in a 
single database. One of the approaches suitable for the DDM is 
to select relevant local patterns from the distributed databases 
[3]. Knowledge integration (KI) is the process by which 
organizations identify, acquire, and utilize knowledge from 
external sources. Existing studies on KI have either researched 
what knowledge organizations gain from which sourc es or what 
processes are needed to do that [4]. With the rapid advancement 
of information technology, flood of digital data collected by 
business, government, and scientific applications need analyzing, 
digesting, and understanding. Scalability has become a necessity 
for data mining  algorithms to process large data  more effectively 
and extract insightful information from large data [5]. In 
cooperative multi -agent systems, roles are used as a design 
concept when creating large systems, they are known to facilitate 
specialization of agents, and they can help to reduce  interference 
in multi -robot domains. The types of tasks that the agents are 
asked to solve and the communicative capabilities of the agents 
significantly affect the way roles are used in cooperative multi -
agent systems [6]. MAS represent a promising appro ach for 
complicated data mining  tasks due to its configuration flexibility 
and parallel processing. This is exploited in encapsulation of 
computational modeling, pre -processing  and post -processing 
methods reflecting industrial standard specifications. The 
ontology of computational agents' capabilities is proposed and 
included in the model. The agent, which implements the DL 
model, supports matchmaking, system integrity checking  and 
automated creation of the system[7].Massive amounts of data 
that are often geographically distributed and owned by different 
organizations are being mined DM infras tructures to fully exploit the benefit of the knowledge contained in these very large data  
repositories[8]. A communication mechanism between multi -
agents was established in th e system, in order to achieve two 
approaches to deal with information processing in a distributed 
way. An algorithm for each approach has been modified from the 
original forms of decision tree building/ making algorithms so 
that it can work under multi -agents computing environments as 
well as single computing environments [9]. An ADDM system 
concerns three key characteristics: interoperability, dynamic 
system configuration, and performance aspects, discussed as 
follows. Interoperability concerns, not only c ollaboration of 
agents in the system, but also external interaction which allow 
new agents to enter the system effortlessly [10].  
 
4.  AN ANALYSIS ON MULTI -AGENT BASED 
DISTRIBUTED DATA MINING SYSTEM  
 One or more agents per network node are responsible for 
examining and analyzing a local data source. In addition, an 
agent may query a knowledge source for existing knowledge. 
The agents communicate with each other during the discovery 
process [6] .  This allows the agents to integrate the new 
knowledge they pro duce into a globally coherent theory. In 
addition, a supervisory agent, responsible for coordinating the 
discovery agents may exist. A graphical interface allows the user 
to assign agents to data sources, and to allocate high level 
discovery goals. It allo ws the user to critique new knowledge 
discovered by the agents, and to direct the agents to new 
discovery goals, including ones that might make use of the newly 
discovered knowledge.  The following Agents are employed in 
Data Mining:  
 
Categorization Agent :-Categorization agent classified terms in -
lieu of format. Such subject have separate category in various 
form; which category is valuable for any instance and it follow 
that event summarization.  
Objective :-three level of category maintain (high, middle, lo w) it 
perform under based.  
Data mining agent : - A data mining agent [7] is a software 
program built for Pre -purpose of finding information efficiently. 
It is a type of intelligent agent that operates valuable information 
to find the relationship between di fferent pieces of information. It 
is a type of agent to detect major trend changes  
Objective : - DMA finding suitable new pertaining information 
efficiently  
Filtering Agent :-A Filtering agent filter required information; it 
will check contents and attachme nt task both include in On End 
of Data Filters (smart screen, intelligent content filtering, file 
filtering, Multiple AV Scan)  
Objective : - Searching message and check filtering 
reinforcement.  
Information Agent :-An individual or company that is charged 
with explaining the various transaction of another party to 
anyone who need to know  
Objective : - Delivery of commodity to give or keep Information . 
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014       4 
ISSN 2250 -3153  
www.ijsrp.org   
 
Figure : 1   A model  of  Multi –Agent system Based data 
Mining  
 
 
User Interface Agent : - The user interface is the space where 
interaction between humans and machines occur effectively and 
control of the machine feedback from machine, operate making 
decisions.  
Objective : - Interaction between human and machines operate all 
levels . 
Interface Agent : - Interface agent to be a program that can also 
affect the objects in a direct manipulation interface, but without 
exploit instruction from user. The interface agent reads input that 
the user presents to the interface and it can make changes to the 
objects the  user sees on the screen.  
Objective:  - Defining of objects it depends on input and output . 
Extraction Agent :-Extraction agent extracts set of information 
regarding object and is used its dilute for any such information 
for further needs. Any information fetch it explain every criteria 
of objects. Collect complete information about the concept. It 
shows object detailed in well -mannered . 
Objective :-Launch every bit of information in detailed manner . 
Retrieval Agent :-In retrieval agent retrieve information w hich 
one has been extracting. Whether this agent executes information 
using data sets and visualization effects etc. it will display 
exactly induced information as well. Such functional value used 
in this format for retrieving procedure.  
Objective : - Execu te information according to demand 
specification . 
Office Agent : - According to portal, office agent will choose 
information where it finds suitable. Different types of office 
agent occur; they work and uses are totally different. It depends 
on functioning values and does their own business. It is very 
purposeful ordinal nature of point.  
Objective :-According to  the work through this agent  is altered as 
per work nature.  
Workflow age nt:-the workflow agent can be configured for 
polling on demand processing. Whe n configured for polling, the 
workflow agent periodically polls (quires) in the database work 
queue for batches of task to be processed. Workflow depends on 
polling.  
Objective : - Priority techniques use to analyze workflow . 
  
4.1. Improving DDM Performance  By Combining 
Distributed Data Mining And Multi -Agent System  
   
Typically communication is a bottleneck. Since 
communication is assumed to be carried out exclusively by 
message passing, a primary goal of many DDM methods in the 
literature is to minimize th e number of messages sent. Some 
methods also attempt to load -balance across sites to prevent 
performance from being dominated by the time and space usage 
of any individual site. As pointed out in , Building a monolithic 
database, in order to perform non -distributed data mining, may 
be infeasible or simply impossible in many applications. The cost 
of transferring large blocks of data may be unaffordable and 
result in very inefficient implementations. Surveys provide a 
broad, up -to-date overview of DDM touchi ng on issues such as: 
clustering, association rule mining, basic statistics computation, 
Bayesian network learning, classification, and the historical roots 
of DDM. The collection describes a variety of DDM algorithms 
(association rule mining, clustering, classification, preprocessing, 
etc.), systems issues in DDM (security, architecture, etc.), and 
some topics in parallel data mining. Survey discusses parallel and 
distributed association rule mining in DDM. Survey discusses a 
broad spectrum of issues in DD M and parallel data mining and 
provides a survey of distributed and parallel association rule 
mining and clustering. Many of the DDM applications deal with 
continuous data streams. Therefore, developing DDM algorithms 
that can handle such stream scenarios is becoming increasingly 
important.  
  
4.2. D ata Mining using Multiple Agents  
 
Data -mining systems differ in certain ways from the 
machine learning algorithms which they are typically derived 
from. Firstly, they have to cope with large amounts of data. For 
example, learning over a census database containing information 
on millions of families is very different from looking at a few 
hand -crafted examples of 'model' families. The second problem 
is that real world data has a tendency to contain errors and 
missi ng information [8] .  
Finally, a data -mining system aims to discover 
knowledge that is novel, useful, and understandable, which 
typically requires a human to focus the search and to provide 
feedback on the knowledge discovered. Our high -level model is 
shown  in Figure 2. One or more agents per network node are 
responsible for examining and analyzing a local data source. In 
addition, an agent may query a knowledge source for existing 
knowledge such as rules or predicate definitions [9]  .The agents 
communicate with each other during the discovery process. This 
allows the agents to integrate the new, individual knowledge they 
produce into a globally coherent theory. A user communicates 
with the agents via a user -interface. In addition, a supervisory 
agent, respon sible for coordinating the discovery agents may 
exist. Figure 2 shows this agent next to the user -interface. The 
interface allows the user to assign agents to data sources, and to 
allocate high level discovery goals. It allows the user to critique 
new know ledge discovered by the agents, and to direct the agents 

International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014       5 
ISSN 2250 -3153  
www.ijsrp.org  to new discovery goals, including ones that might make use of 
the new knowledge.  
 
 
Figure 2: Data -Mining Using Multiple Agents  
 
As far as possible, intention is to base the work on the integration 
of existing technologies in the field of software agents and first 
order learning. This is in order to concentrate on the core issues 
of distributed data -mining. We intend to use agents based on 
Agent Oriented Programming, and the techniques developed as 
part of the Knowledge Sharing Effort.  
Intelligent agents represent an important opportunity to 
optimize knowledge management. Agents and data mining can 
work together to achieve required target. Data mining agents 
perform various functions of data mining. It  is increasingly 
significant to develop better methods and techniques to organize 
the data for better decision making processes. In a competitive 
world, modern organizations focus on locating, storing, 
transferring and  efficiently using their own informati on in order 
to better manage their intellectual capital. Main focus is to find 
methods and techniques to organize huge data provided by 
transactions or other activities and to extract useful patterns, 
relations, associations from data etc. In different app lications, it 
is necessary to know what to do, when and  how to do it, in order 
to complete the pre -established tasks for the proposed objectives, 
by means of self -decision systems. These systems are known in 
literature as agents. Intelligent agents act rob ustly in a flexible, 
open environment. Knowledge discovery process can be assisted 
by agents in order to increase the quality of knowledge and to 
simplify the main processes of identifying patterns from huge 
data volumes. Intelligent agents and data mining  share the same 
objectives in order to assist decision making process.  
Agents, are special types of software applications, have 
become increasingly popular in computing world in recent years. 
Some of the reasons for this popularity are their flexibility, 
modularity and general applicability to a wide range of problems 
like data filtering and analysis, information brokering, condition 
monitoring and alarm generation, workflow management, 
personal assistance simulation and gaming. Intelligent agents can help making  computer systems easier to use, enable finding and 
filtering information, customizing views of information and 
automating work.  
 
5. Conclusions and Future Enhancement  
This paper describe s some of our work about an agent -based 
approach to distributed knowledge discovery . Our  goal is that 
agent -based knowledge discovery will allow us to maximize the 
usage of distributed computing resources, and minimize the 
preface  and propositional results which do not reflect on the 
more complex aspects,  as well as facilitate the easy integration 
and use of multiple  agents . As far as possible, our intention is to 
base our work on the integration of existing technologies. This is 
in order to concentrate on the core issues of how agents can 
resolve differen t views of the world.  However, the main area of 
investigation is how the agents should interact, and how the 
knowledge should be integrated. We are currently investigating 
how agents should be selected to work on a given discovery goal.  
A solution for this  problem could be an intelligent system based 
on agents. Data mining and intelligent agents can make a 
common front to help people in the decision making process, to 
elaborate decisional  
REFERENCES  
[1]. Clifton, Christopher. "Encyclopedia Britannica: Definition Of Data Mining" . 
Retrieved 2012.  
[2].  Ireneusz Czarnowsk ,”Agent And Multi -Agent Systems: Technologies And 
Applications” - Kesamsta  , Pp. 724 -733, 2009.  
[3]. Ireneusz Czarnowski , Piotr Jedrzejowicz  International Conference On 
Adaptive And Natural Computing Algorithms - Icannga  , Pp. 609 -618.2009.  
[4.] Naeemkhalid Janjua , Farookhkhadeer Hussain , Omarkhadeer Hussain  
“Semantic Information And Knowledge Integration Through Argumentative 
Reasoning To Support Intelligent Decision Making   “: Information Systems 
Frontiers - Isf , Vol. 15, Pp. 167 -192, 2013  
[5]. Daxin Tian , Kuifeng Ma  “A Scaling -Up Machine Learning Algorithm” Vol. 
7, No. 1, Pp. 39 -55 , 2010.  
[6]. Adam Campbell , Annie S. Wu  “Multi -Agent Role Allocation: Issues, 
Approaches, and Multiple Perspectives “Vol. 22, No. 2, Pp. 317 -355, 2011.  
[7]. Roman Neruda , Ondřej Kazík  “Modeling Data Mining Processes In 
Computational Multi -Agent Systems” 10.1145/2077489.2077500 , 2011.  
[8]. M-Tahar Kechadi ” The Data Wave: Data Management And Mining”, 
Workshop On Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure For Collaborative 
Enterprises - Wetice  , Pp. 7 -11, 2 010 
[9]. Sung Gook Kim , Kyeong Deok Woo , Jerzy W. Bala , Sung Wook Baik  
“Distributed Data Mining System Based On Multi -Agent Communication 
Mechanism “,Pp. 100 -109, 2010.  
[10].  Priyanka Makkar Et. Al. / (Ijcse) International Journal On Computer 
Science And Engineering Vol. 02, No. 04, 1237 -1244 “ Distributed  Data  Mining  
And Mining  “2010.  
 
AUTHORS  
First  Author – R.HEMAMALINI,  Research scholar St.Peter’s  
University , Asst Professor,  Jaya College of Arts and Science -
Thiruninravur., hemasureshbabu@yahoo.co.in  
Second  Author –. Dr.L.JOSEPHINE MARY, Professor & HOD, 
MCA Dept. Sri Ram  Engineering College,Veppampet, 
josimgr@yahoo.co.in  
 

International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 4, Issue 6, June 2014       6 
ISSN 2250 -3153  
www.ijsrp.org   
