Keshav Jindal  et al.  International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 2, June 2016 , pp. 228-232 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 228-   Comparative Study of Different Multi -
Agent based Decision Support System  
Keshav  Jindal1, Dr. Ripuranjan Sinha2, Dr. S. Srinivasan3 
1Research Scholar, Suresh Gyan Vihar University Jaipur  
2Profes sor & Associate  Dean , Suresh Gyan Vihar University Jaipur  
3Professor & Head, P.D.M Engineering College, Bhadurgarh, Haryana  
Abstract - There has been growing on big data since last decade for  discovering useful trends or patterns that 
are used in production and decision m aking. Multi agent based decision support system an  automated judgment 
that supports decision making is composed  of human and computer interaction to help in decision making  
accuracy. Also multi -agent systems (MAS) are collections of  independent intelligent entities that collaborate in 
the joint  resolution of a complex p roblem. Multi -agent based decision  support systems can be used to solve 
large -scale convention  problem. This paper is a survey of the recent research in multi -agent  based decision 
support systems to support for  classification problems. The purpose of the survey described in  this paper is the 
development of a novel large -scale production system based on Multi -agent based Decision Support System 
(MDSS) for distributed Case-base.   
Keywords -MAS, DSS, CBR, MDSS   
I. INTRODUCTION  
Production is a procedure of makeover (change) inputs 
(raw-materials) into productivity (complete goods). 
Economic well -being is created in a production process, 
meaning all economic activities that aim directly or 
indirectly to satisfy human wants and nee ds. The degree to 
which the needs are satisfied is often accepted as a 
measure of economic well -being. In production there are 
two features which explain increasing economic well -
being. They are improving quality -price -ratio of goods and 
services and incre asing incomes from growing and more 
efficient market production.  
Production scheduling, or production setting up, is a 
phrase with the purpose of wrap every feature of 
operations, starting from labor force actions to 
manufactured goods deliverance. Produc tion scheduling is 
approximately wholly seen into industrialized 
surroundings; though, a lot of the method working in 
production planning be able to as well as used by several 
examine sloping productions [3].  
Production planning is mainly worried with the  well-
organized use of possessions. At the same time it is 
occasionally referred to as action planning, and it utilize 
lots of the same techniques, the most important individual 
feature is that production setting up is focused on the 
concrete production, w hile procedure scheduling seem to 
be at the procedures as a entire.  
Static against Dynamic Planning  
There are two major category of production scheduling: 
static and dynamic. Static scheduling carries and statement 
with the purpose of the entire steps in a  procedure can be 
distinct plus determination not modify. In distinction, 
dynamic scheduling suppose to steps in the procedure will 
modify, so nothing is designed until the order is 
established. Dynamic planning mechanism extremely well  
in surroundings eve rywhere near is a elevated level of 
customization.  
An illustration of a static preparation is a retail Clothes 
Corporation, in which manufacture levels are resolute up 
to a year in precede. An example of a dynamic plan is a floral store; there might be a f ew preparations for exhibit 
and achievable obtain, but the major focal point is on 
making of tradition preparations following a position is 
established.  
We present the class of scheduling problems, which 
deal with the issue of associating one or several re sources 
to activities over a certain time period, subject to specific 
restrictions.  
Scheduling troubles happen in a number of dissimilar 
areas as production scheduling, personnel scheduling, 
manufactured goods pattern, and shipping. Tangible 
troubles in th is field are, for illustration, industrialized 
production setting up, airfield landing strip scheduling, 
and labor force project. The aim is to optimize a number 
of object purposes depending on the applicative area at 
hand. For illustration in developed su rroundings the utility 
to optimize is regularly the entirety dispensation instance, 
i.e., the instance onwards in view of the fact that the 
commencements of the primary job till the ending of the 
most recent one [3].  
Production arrangement is component of a process called 
industrialized preparation and control (PAC) which 
include the behavior achieve in a corporation to plan plus 
manage its production, from primary demand organization 
to implementation of occupation on the shop level. 
Management’s aspiratio n to be extra spirited as well as to 
enlarge profits through industrialized is marked. Customer 
receptiveness, better productivity, lower developed 
expenditure, improved quality, little phase period, 
restricted access manage as well as equipped 
preventabil ity, amongst many additional themes, are hot 
concerns on manager´s mentality. The administration of 
developed development is a multifaceted difficulty to 
facilitate purpose is to sell commodities and services to the 
marketplace, during inside production po ssessions and 
provider agreement and capability. It is consequently 
sensible to arrangement the clarification of the 
predicament hierarchically, allowing for different 
aggregation intensity of in sequence along with 
conclusion . 
 
Keshav Jindal  et al.  International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 2, June 2016 , pp. 228-232 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 229-  II. OVERVIEW OF MULTI – AGENT S YSTEMS  
Multi -Agent Systems (MAS) contain the emergent 
functions wherever it is helpful to describe purpose 
throughout a lot of independent components. As multi -
agent scheme get additional difficult, questions happen 
about concerning the most excellent meth od to manage 
agent movement and so application presentation. Center 
most organize of MAS is individual method, but is of 
restricted utilize since of the danger of dependence on the 
scheming constituent, and the important be short of of 
strength. Besides ma ke small intellect when agent has 
potential of independence that is able to present helpful 
benefits in operations. Moderately decentralized organize 
is a substitute, except resources of implement this lacking 
distracting agent presentation in hold up of r equests are 
imperative. Methods of self -association are helpful for the 
reason that agents be able to be prepared into patterns for 
useful purpose without impressive outside central control . 
III. AGENT AND MAS ATTRIBUTES  
The simplest definition of an agent has been used to 
describe entity that is located in several atmospheres over 
which it has partial control and particular objectives to 
achieve. An agent has well -defined boundaries and 
interfaces and is able to monitor the environment through 
sensors or data a ccess from other sources and modify it by 
reacting autonomously to changes that occur in it. It has 
therefore been argued that, at this level, some simple 
existing control and protection systems employed at 
electrical distribution systems such as protectio n relays 
could also be classed as “agents”.  
This simple definition of an “agent” has been extended in 
order to include the reasoning and communication 
capabilities of the agent as well. According to this 
definition, the four key agent characteristic origin ates in 
the article are:  
 Autonomy  
The intelligent agents are capable to execute the 
preponderance of their problem solving tasks not 
including the straight interference of humans or 
other agents, and they have the full control over 
their own actions and interior circumstances.  
 Social ability  
The intelligent agents are competent to work 
together with other intelligent agents and humans 
for resolving their own crisis and to assist others 
with their activities.  
 Responsiveness  
The intelligent agents are capable of 
distinguishing their environment and react in a 
well-timed fashion to changes occurring in the 
environment. This factor indicates the intelligent 
agents efficiency regarding the current problem 
they are working.  
 Temporal stability  
The intelligen t agents are competent to judge the 
process exclusive of the end, incessantly running 
and developing its functions.  
 Adaptively  
The intelligent agents support their adoption 
through the learning process. The intelligent agents are proficient to discover the  changes in 
the environment & modify its activities based on 
that learning.  
 Mobility  
The intelligent agents are capable of shifting from 
one circumstance to another or moving the 
agent’s code and starting the agent anew, or by 
serializing code and states, allowing the agent to 
persist completing in a new perspective, retaining 
its state to continue its work.  
 Persistence  
The Intelligent agents support  the quantity to 
which the infrastructure enables agents to 
preserve information and situation over extended  
periods of time in problem solving phenomena.  
 Pro-activeness  
The intelligent agents act in reaction to their 
environment. They can demonstrate 
opportunistic, goal -directed behavior and taking 
the initiative regarding the situations . 
IV. REVIEW  OF MULTI AGENT BASED ON DSS 
Collinson PO  (1997) proposed Health Intelligence System 
is a straight included decision support system (DSS) 
considered to get together the necessities designed for 
intelligent real time scientific information managing in 
important checkup surroundings plus establishm ent for the 
expansion of the subsequently propagation of intellectual 
health mechanism. Clinical HIS is an object oriented 
structure developed in C++ to execute under Microsoft 
Windows as an origin intelligent agent [8]. 
Maurice E. Cohen (2002) presents an  achievement of 
neural networks in analysis depends not single on 
knowledge method and system organization except also on 
information superiority. If inadequate data are obtainable, 
additional data should be integrated. In this effort, expert 
resulting met a information complement a hierarchy of 
neural networks so as to jointly a ct as an intellectual agent. 
[9]. 
Balter J  (2002) in this article, th e writer presents a MAS 
structure for data mining. This appliance, foundation on a 
network line, presents a set of functionalities permitting 
operating several cases and more than thousands of 
neurological examinations amass in a health check 
database. The  plan is to extort health data using data 
mining algorithms as well as to provide an information 
foundation with relevant data. The multi agent policy 
gives the opportunity to deal out the information managing 
procedure involving quite a lot of independent  things. This 
structure offer a corresponding with f lexible information 
handling.[10]  
Zaid Hassan (2002) proposed as a container for an 
intellectual agent base structure for information detection 
in a dispersed healthiness care surroundings containing 
several assorted healthcare information warehouse. 
Information arbitrates information modernism, particularly 
from severa l assorted information possessions, is a 
monotonous procedure as well as imposes important 
prepared restrictions on end consumers. We exhibit that 
independent, susceptible plus anxious intelligent agents 
nearby an occurrence to manufacture end -user leaning , 
Keshav Jindal  et al.  International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 2, June 2016 , pp. 228-232 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 230-  enclosed, significance extra decision support scheduling 
services for healthcare proficient’s, manage as well as 
strategy manufacturer, without the required for a priori 
methodological information. While effectual healthcare is 
stranded in good message, knowledge allocation, 
continuous knowledge and energetic events, we utilize 
intelligent agents to execute an Agent based Data Mining 
Info arrangement that provide a collection of healthcare 
oriented decision  support scheduling services.[11 ]. 
Okba Kazar  (2004) presents an The medicine domain is an 
enormous surroundings differentiate by its communal plus 
disseminated decisional feature, along with its 
organization of mind, necessitating a announcement and a 
composite organization of the a range of scientific shapes 
of orientation among the various medical departments, 
doctors and patients. The introduction of multi -agents 
system into the medical fields facilitates the management 
of the decisions and the actions, and ensures the 
communication and coordination b y reducing the errors of 
diagnosis and treatment, and by improving time required 
to seek the medical resources, and other medical 
departments. The purpose of this article is to recommend a 
multi -agents system (M.A.S), which allocates the analysis 
on three agents. Every agent is a expert intelligent in the 
direction of choose plus corresponding through the 
additional agents. [ 12]. 
Horacio (2004) presented  a physical condition agent, its 
get better the categorization of brain tumors throughout 
multi agent dec ision support (MADSS) over a scattered 
system of restricted list. Physical condition Agents 
determination not single expand new example detection 
technique for a distributed categorization along with 
investigation of DNA data, other than as well define a 
technique to evaluate the superiority with usability of a 
new applicant confined list surrounding a situate of new 
suitcases, foundation on a consonance achieve [ 13]. 
Nikolaos (2004) described, we suggest a revolutionary 
multi criterion method, realize in a  decision support 
system. These multi criterion technique trimmings by 
earnings of an most favorable allotment diagram. Agent 
Allocator is an simple to employ purpose which agree to 
the conclusion producer to form the difficulty during its 
contribution dia logs with utilize the concluding answer 
future by the scheme. In this manuscript, though a little 
facial appearance of the DSS are discussed, we spotlight 
additional on the future method with the hypothetical 
environment of the job allotment conclusion [ 14]. 
Carla Coffin (2004) proposed as an cost -effective method 
to repurpose managerial information in regulate to 
promote a curriculum of illness avoidance in an outpatient 
circumstance. A demonstration mechanized look for 
behavior by means of managerial infi rmary expulsion 
information to recognize unwearied acknowledge to a 
health check teaching component  [15]. 
Bernardo Celda (2006) improves the categorization of 
tumors using multi -agent decision support in excess of a 
distributed system of restricted database or Data 
warehouses. Agents will not just expand new prototype 
gratitude technique for a distributed categorization plus 
invest igation of data, except as well describe a technique 
to assess the excellence plus usability of a innovative applicant limited list enclosing a position of new suitcases, 
stand on a compatibility attain. [ 16]. 
Louie F. Cervantes (2006) a framework for everywhere 
health care support on multi agent is obtainable. This 
article suggests a portable agent for investigation maintain 
in universally healthcare. The dedicated portable agent 
categorizes the information of tolerant by use neuro fuzzy 
algorithm for conversation explanation. A pre giving out 
method situate on the sketch of a expert is use to strain the 
information as of the narration of tolerant. Consequence of 
neuro fuzzy from cross justification examination 
demonstrates a elevated correct categoriza tion in 
information contrast to additiona l extremely precise 
classifiers [17]. 
Marina (2007) presents a structural design of an agent 
based decision support system for health check 
circumstances evaluation. The scheme entertains 
arithmetical report in form  of straight with indirect 
contamination pointer principles. The eventual objective 
of the representation multi -agent system is to assess the 
collision of the revelation to contaminant in inhabitant’s 
fitness. The planned agent based decision support syste m 
interacts through soul in concurrent “what -if” situation, as 
long as the client with confirmation for most favorable 
conclusion making [18].  
Christina Klüver (2009) presented a  dependable, cost -
competent; with quick health check ruling is still confront 
in today’s world. This document here a health check 
analysis scheme that merge the compensations of multi -
agent system tools with neural arrangement in arrange to 
comprehend a extremely consistent, flexible, expandable, 
limber, plus vigorous analysis schem e for illness. The 
health check analysis scheme consists of a prearranged 
association of checkup specialists understand by agents 
with the aim of work together in arrange to give a feasible 
health check analysis. Every agent has a convinced 
liability. The agents rely on a reactive prototype supported 
corresponding process. Their authority is considerably 
enlarged by typical type of neural networks which stand 
for the analysis ability of the agents [ 19]. 
Bessedik Imene(2009) presents the grouping among Web 
services with courseware agents presents a capable 
calculating pattern for well -organized examine assortment 
and incorporation of inter -organizational industry process. 
This manuscript suggest an agent support Web based 
decision support system, the major in volvement of our 
learning is to present an well -organized device that helps 
users discover in sequence possessions accessible as an 
online examine inside Intranet. The decision construction 
is not just directed by the data make available by Decision 
suppor t system but slightly than the Web knowledge, the 
development is completely support on communiqué 
linking Internet service provider Agents as well as Web 
agent. Whereas discussing compromise for divergence 
solves to allocate ordinary resources, decision ce nter 
utilize Web service to behav ior various balancing tasks. 
[20]. 
Ming FU (2010) In this paper, the author present  using the 
features Agent has, present to the wants of the Group 
Decision Support System (GDSS), a new Group DSS 
structure established on Mu lti-Agent is obtainable; the 
communication mechanism, the cooperation, negotiation 
Keshav Jindal  et al.  International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 2, June 2016 , pp. 228-232 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 231-  and coordination of Multi -Agent in G DSS is studied and 
analyzed [ 21]. 
Ashwini kumar Kulkarni  (2011) describes Microarray 
present in organize on gene manifestation stage of gene s in 
a cavity introverted testing. In this study judgment of 
group of estimating rightness of two different classifiers, 
inherited propaganda in addition to genetically expand 
wrapping up foliage. Inherited indoctrination established 
out to be the superior  classifier in sustain of this 
information set maintain on section under the receiver 
operational unique curving through entire rightness by 
way of collective in succession found feature compilation. 
We carry to a slam that inherited propaganda communally 
through collective in organize based attribute compilation 
is the mainstream well structured alternate to the easy to 
get to predict techniques [ 22]. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this survey paper we have presented how multi -agent  
based  decision support system has been  integrated in 
production scheduling p roblems to resolve various  
production r elated problems.  
TABLE 1 THE COMPARISON BETWEEN DIFFERENT 
MODELS  
 
 
This survey paper aimed at  providing the basic 
information an d related work u sing multi -agent based 
decision support system (M DSS). No one of the designed  
techniques examined controlled time critical decisions or 
made  try to reduce the decision time only to attempt to 
increase the  decision acc uracy. Most of the agent -based 
DSSs examined  checked support for distributed casebase 
except four systems not  support distributed database . Only two of the systems  collect data from any real -time data 
streams.   
References  
[1] Kenneth N. McKay, Vincent C. S. Wiers, “Planning, 
scheduling and d ispatching tasks in production control”, in 
Springer Journal on Cognition, Technology & Work, Volume 5, 
Issue 2, pp 82 –93,June 2003.  
 [2] Kjell Olofsson, “An investigation into production scheduling 
systems” in Master Thesis 2006.  
[3] George J. Hall, “Non -convex costs and capital utilization: A 
study of production scheduling at automobile assembly plants”, 
in Elsevier Journal on Journal of Monetary Economics pp. 681 -
716, 2000.  
 [4] Marcius Fabius Henriques Carvalho and Rosana Beatriz 
Baptista, “Production Scheduling on Practical Problems” in 
Production Scheduling by InTech Publisher pp.157 -184, January 
2012.  
[5] “Improving the organization and management of extension ”, 
by M. W. Waldron, J. Vsanthakumar, and S. Arulraj,  Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, 1997.  
[6]  A. Hamilton -Wright, “Transparent Decision Support Using 
Statistical Evidence,” PhD dissertation, Systems Design Eng., 
Univ. of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, Nov. 2005.  
 
 [7] D. Kalogeropoulos, E.R. Carson and P.D. Collinson,” 
Clinical -HINTS: Integrated Intelligent ICU Patient Monitoring 
and Information Management System”, US National Library of 
Medicine National Institutes of Health, Stud Health Technol 
Inform, Vol. 43, pp. 906 -1010, 1997.  
 [8] M. E. Cohen, D. L. Hudson,” Meta Neural Networks as 
Intelligent Agents for Diagnosis”, Neural Networks, IJCNN '02. 
Proceedings of the International Joint, IEEE, Vol. 1, No. 3, Pages 
233 – 238, 2002.  
[9] J. Balter, A. Labarre -Vila, D. Ziebel in, C. Garbay,” A 
knowledge -driven agent -centred framework for data mining in 
EMG”, US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of 
Health, C R Biol, Vol. 325, No. 4, Pages375 -82, 2002.  
[10] S. Z. H. Zaid, S. S. R. Abidi and S. Manickam,” Leveraging  
Intelligent Agents for Knowledge Discovery from Heterogeneous 
Healthcare Data Repositories”, US National Library of Medicine 
National Institutes of Health, Vol. 90, Pages 335 -340, 2002.  
[11] O. Kazar, Z. Sahnoun and L. Frecon,” Multi -agents system 
for med ical diagnosis”, International Conference on Intelligent 
System and Knowledge Engineering, Vol. 1, pp. 1265 - 1270, 
2008.  
[12] H. Gonzalez -Velez, M. Mier, C. Arus, B. Celda, S. V. 
Huffel, P. Lewis, A. Peet and M. Robles,” Agent -Based 
Distributed Decision Su pport System for Brain Tumour 
Diagnosis and Prognosis” Applied Intelligence, Spring Link, 
Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 191 -202, June 2009.  
[13] Nikolaos F. Matsatsinis, Pavlos Delias, “ Implementing an 
Agent -based Decision Support System for Task Allocation: a 
Multi -criteria Approach ”, pp. 128 -141, 2004.  
[14] Coffin, C., Saunders, C., Thomas, C., Loewen, A., 
Campbell, N., and Ghali, “ Using intelligent agents to repurpose 
administrative data in fostering disease prevention in an 
outpatient context: the case of pneumoc occal vaccination ” in 
37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences . 2004.  
[15] C. Arus, B. Celda, S. Dasmahaptra and D. Dupplaw, “On 
the Design of a Web -Based Decision Support System for Brain 
Tumour Diagnosis Using Distributed Agents”, I nternational 
Conference, Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology 
Workshops, IEEE, pp. 208 -211, 2006.  
[16] R. M. A. Mateo, L. F. Cervantes, H. Yang and J. Lee, “ 
Mobile Agents using Data mining for Diagnosis Support in 
Ubiquitous Healthcare”, Agen t and Multi -Agent Systems: 

Keshav Jindal  et al.  International Journal of Recent Research  Aspects ISSN: 2349 -7688, Vol. 3 , 
Issue 2, June 2016 , pp. 228-232 
© 201 6 IJRRA All Rights Reserved     page - 232-  Technologies and Applications Lecture Notes in computer 
Science, Springer link, Vol. 4496, Pages795 -804, 2006.  
[17] M. V. Sokolova and A. F. Caballero, “An Agent -Based 
Decision Support System for Ecological -Medical Situation 
Anal ysis”, Nature Inspired Problem -Solving Methods in 
Knowledge Engineering Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Vol. 4528, pp. 511 -520, 2007.  
[18] C. Klüver, J. Klüver and R. Unland,” A Medical Diagnosis 
System based on MAS Technology and Neural Networks”, 
BPSC, vol. 147, pp.179 -191, 2009.  
[19] Imène Bessedik, Noria Taghezout, “A Multi -agent 
Framework for a Web -based Decision Support System Applied 
to Manufacturing System, pp. 12 -23, 2009.   [20] I. J. Perez, F. J. Cabrerizo and E. Herrera -Viedma, "A 
Mobile D ecision Support System for Dynamic Group Decision -
Making Problems," in  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans , vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 
1244 -1256, Nov. 2010.  
[21] Ming FU, Herouzi Lin, Dun CAO, “ Research on the Key 
Techn ology of Group Decision Support System Based on Multi -
Agent ”, Journal of Computational Information Systems 6:14, 
4pp. 897 -4904, December 2010.  
[22] Ashwini Kumar Kulkarni, B.S.C Naveen Kumar, “Colon 
Cancer prediction with genetics profiles using evolutiona ry 
techniques” in Journal Experts systems with applications: An 
International Journal, Volume 38, Issue 3, pp  2752 -2757, 2011.  
 
 
 
 
 
