See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/4095252
Goal oriented modeling for intelligent software agents
Conf erence Paper  · Oct ober 2004
DOI: 10.1109/IA T.2004.1343014  · Sour ce: IEEE Xplor e
CITATIONS
50READS
270
4 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
Loving hut  View pr oject
Optimiz ation of multi-ag ent or ganiz ations  View pr oject
Chuny an Miao
Nany ang T echnologic al Univ ersity
272 PUBLICA TIONS    3,410  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Zhiqi Shen  on 24 Januar y 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
Goal Oriented Modeling for Intelligent Software Agents
Zhiqi Shen1, Chunyan Miao2, Xuehong Tao1, Robert Gay1
1Information Communication Institute, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
ezqshen@pmail.ntu.edu.sg, {eklgay, xhtao}@ntu.edu.sg
2School of Computer Engineering, Nany ang Technological University, Singapore
ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg
Abstract
Agents are goal oriented, autonomous, adaptive, and
cooperative. Goal orientation is an increasingly
recognized paradigm for agent modeling anddevelopment. In this paper, we present Goal Net, a goal-oriented modeling method to model the goals of an agent
and to model agent coordination in a multi-agent
environment. Goal Net also serves as a practicalmethodology for engineering agent oriented softwaresystems.
1. Introduction
Agent technology represents an exciting new means of
analyzing, designing and building complex software
systems [3]. The autonomous, adaptive, and cooperative
as well as the goal-oriented and intelligent characters ofgents make agent based systems a very promisingsoftware solution for next generation of software in
various domains such as service oriented grid computing.
As a result, systems composed of interaction autonomousagents are emerging as a new software engineeringparadigm [6].
Nevertheless, a large majority of the current efforts on
agent modeling and development still employ object-oriented methodologies, which model an agent as anextended object or so-called “smart object” [4]. Agents are
goal oriented, which necessitates a shift in modelling
paradigm, from object-oriented modeling to goal-orientedmodeling.
Goal orientation is an increasingly recognized
paradigm for agent modeling and development [6]. Anagent goal model offers a method to link an agent's actionstowards it goals.
The autonomy currently used in agent literature is
referable to the behavior autonomy with the assumptionthat the goal of an agent is implicitly defined in agentbehaviors. In a dynamic changing environment, agentsmight need to derive/pursue new goals [1]. Without
internal control of agents’ own goals, agents can
irrationally pursue unrealistic goals.Despite the significant progress in the field of agent
research, to date, there is still a lack of widespread
development and deployment of agent systems and multi-
agent systems. One of the major reasons is that research
on narrowing the gap between agent mental models andagent implementation is rare [6].
In the paper, a novel goal oriented model, Goal Net, is
proposed, not only to model the agents but also to bridgethe gap between the agent model and its implementation.In addition to a mental model of agents, Goal Net alsoserves as a basis of a practical methodology for
engineering agent oriented software systems.
Following this introduction, section 2 presents the
details of Goal Net, for addressing the above issues.
Section 3 illustrates the proposed goal oriented modeling
approach through a case study in grid environment. Theconclusion is reached in section 4.
2. Goal Oriented Modeling for Software
Agents
Given this new landscape of agent-oriented software
engineering, applications are designed and developed in
terms of autonomous software entities (agents) that can
achieve their objectives (goals) by interacting with each
other. Agents are goal oriented. A goal of an agent can be
described as a desired state that the agent intends toachieve. To solve a real world problem, an agent’s goalcan be very complex. Goal Net is proposed to model such
complex goals of agents in an open distributed and
dynamic changing environment.
2.1 Goal Net
Goal Net is composed of four basic objects: states ,
transitions ,arcs and tokens .T h e states , represented by
circles, are used to represent different states that agents
need to go through to reach their goals. A state is
connected to other states via transitions , represented by
vertical bars. A transition specifies the relationshipsbetween the states it joins. Each transition has at least aninput state and an output state . Each transition is
associated with a task list and a task function. The task list
defines the tasks an agent may perform in order to transit
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International C onference on Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT’04) 
0-7695-2101-0/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 

from the input states to the output states. The arcs,
represented by arrows, are used to connect states to
transitions and transitions to states. An arc indicates the
relationships between the state and the transition itconnects. The tokens a r eu s e dt op r e s e n td y n a m i c
behaviors of the goal model. When a token arrives in a
state, it indicates a state change on that state and the
progress of the goal pursuing.
There are two kinds of states in the model, atomic
states and composite states. An atomic state , represented
by a blank circle, accommodates a single state, whichcould not be split any more; a composite state ,r e p r e s e n t e d
by a shadowed circle, may be split into states (eithercomposite or atomic) connected via transitions.
A Goal Net is hierarchically structured. The root
composite state at the highest level of the hierarchicalstructure represents the overall goal of the agent and thecomposite states in lower levels of the hierarchical
structure represent sub-goals of the agent. A higher level
of composite states (goal or sub goals) can be split intolower-level states connected via transitions. An agentcommences its goal pursuit from the root state; it then
goes through the hierarchical structure to reach its final
goal. The whole model can be viewed as goalshierarchically connected by transitions.
Through Goal Net a high level concept of goal
obtained from requirement analysis can be furtherdecomposed to lower level sub goals that links to agent’sbehaviour for agent implementation. Most of the agentoriented software methodologies (Gaia, tropos, MaSE etc.)
are isolated from the agent mental model [6]. Goal Net
serves as both an agent mental model and a softwaremethodology that bridges the gap from high level conceptof goal model and low level agent implementations.
To facilitate agents to achieve their goals in a satisfied
time frame, it’s important to model the temporalrelationships among goals and sub goals. Transitions inGoal Net can represent four basic temporal relationships
between states: sequence, choice, concurrency, and
synchronization .
 Sequence : Sequential relationship designates a
direct connection in sequence from the inputstates to the output states. For example, in Figure
1, State iis connected to State i+1 via a
transition. This implies that State i+1 should be
reached after State iis reached.
Figure 1 A sequence relationship
 Concurrency : Cocurrent relationship specifies a
concurrent occurrence between states. Forexample, in Figure 2, State i+1 and state i+2 aretwo concurrent states, which are achieved
simultaneously.
Figure 2 A concurrency relationship
 Choice :C h o i c e relationship specifies a selective
connection from one state to other states. In
Figure 3, State iis connected to State i+2, and
state i+1. This indicates agent may choose to
proceed from State ito State i+2, or from State i
to State i+1. The goal selection mechanisms are
used to solve the conflicts introduced by this type
of relationship.
Figure 3 A choice relationship
 Synchronization : Synchronization relationship
specifies a synchronization point among states.
For example, in Figure 4, State iand state i+1 are
synchronized before the state i+2.
Figure 4 A synchronization relationship
Most of the current agent oriented software
methodologies do not deal with temporal relationships of
goals and sub-goals. With different combinations of the
above four relationships, Goal Net supports a wide range
of complicated temporal relationships between goals,
which could accommodate various complex goals of theintelligent agents.
To link an agent’s goals and actions, Goal Net defines
three types of transitions (Figure 5) corresponding to the
three strategies of action selection mechanisms, which willbe discussed in details in the following: direct ,conditional
andprobabilistic .
Figure 5 The types of transitions
The direct transitions, represented by vertical bars or
rectangles, indicate the input states can be transited to theoutput states via a fixed action or a fixed sequence ofactions. There is no action selection mechanism involved.
State i State i+1State iState i+2State i+1
Direct Probabilistic ConditionalState iState i+2State i+1
State i
State i+2
State i+1
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International C onference on Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT’04) 
0-7695-2101-0/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 

The conditional transitions, represented by diamonds,
indicate the task, which makes a transition fire after
completion, must be selected dynamically according to the
runtime conditions. Rule-based reasoning will be involvedfor the action selection. A hexagon represents aprobabilistic transition, in which the probabilistic
inference will be used to select actions in an uncertainenvironment. The three action selection strategiescorresponding to the above transitions will be discussed inthe next section.
2.2 Goal Selection and Action Selection
An agent tries to achieve a set of goals in a complex,
dynamic environment. It reasons and decides itself how toselect the next goal and what actions it should take so thatits goal is attended to successfully.
The fundamental goal selection in Goal Net is to enable
agents to choose the right goal at right time that leads tothe final goal within the expected time frame and costbudget in real world environment. There are a number of
measurement factors that affect the goal selection.
 Achievement: represents a recognizable benefit
of reaching a goal;
 Cost: means the time, memory, money, etc. spent
or required for transiting from one state to
another;
 Constraint: is enforced requirement for achievingag o a l ;
 Index: is a function that maps costs andachievements to a real number to compare two ormore choices of goal selection.
Based on the requirements of minimizing the cost,
maximizing the achievement and satisfying constraints,we have developed four algorithms for selecting goals indifferent situations.
These algorithms take into account of both internal
factors from the domain knowledge and external factorsfrom the real world environment for the goal/actionselection. In a Goal Net, transitions are associated withtasks, each of which involves many actions. As described
in Section 2.1, there are three types of transitions in the
model: direct, conditional and probabilistic correspondingto three types of action selection strategies: sequentialexecution, rule-based inference and probabilistic inference
respectively.
 Sequential execution: This is the simplest
situation. There is no action selection needed.Agents can move from one state to the next state
by the execution of a fixed sequence of actions.
 Rule-based inference: In this situation, complete
information for action selection is held. Agentscan make decision according to the rules and
current values of all the factors or states. Probabilistic inference: In this situation,
information for action selection is not complete.
A Bayesian network that represents the
relationships between factors and actions can be
constructed. The agent then reasons its actionsthrough the Bayesian network inference.
Agents are driven by a set of goals. In order to achieve
those goals agents need to undertake actions. Goalselection and action selection for reaching goals are twoimportant issues to agent autonomy. Goal Net facilitates
both goal selection and action selection of the agents and
enables the agents to present not only behavior autonomy
but also goal autonomy.
2.3 Modeling Multi-agent Systems
When a problem is complex, a single agent may not be
able to handle it with an acceptable performance.Therefore, in a Goal Net, we try to avoid such situation by
1) using hierarchical composite goals to reduce the
complexity, and
2) using multiple agents for load balancing to
improve the performance.
When a Goal Net is too complex to be realized by a
single agent, a sub-goal can be used to form the goal
model of a new agent. As a result, a multi-agent system
can be derived from the Goal Net. Agents in a multi-agent
system modeled by Goal Net, are organized in ahierarchical structure, called agent hierarchy . The higher
level of agent becomes a coordinator of lower level ofagents. At the same time, it pursues its own goals. Thegoal represented in the original model becomes the
common goal of the derived multi-agent system. The
transitions between states define the coordination tasks
and schedules.
2.4 Goal Oriented Agent Modeling Methodology
The proposed goal modeling methods for agent
development forms an approach for modeling and
designing goal-oriented agent systems towards a practicalmethodology. In summary, following is a set of modeling
methods at different levels.
1) Goal-Oriented Problem Modeling and Analysis
Goal Net can serve as a problem modeling and analysis
tool from the beginning of requirement analysis. Using
Goal Net, the requirements analysis can be revealed in the
process of elaborating a goal hierarchy.
2) Refining Goals with Behaviors
In this phase, the goal model is consolidated; the tasks
and actions are defined for goal pursuit; the conditions and
constraints of goals and tasks are identified; for each state
of goal pursuing, the internal and external factors for thedecision-making are identified.
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International C onference on Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT’04) 
0-7695-2101-0/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 

3) Agent Identification
Goal Net has the ability to decompose a real world
problem into a Goal Net from which a set of agents can beidentified to form a multi-agent system.
4) Goal Autonomous Multi-agent System DesignIn this phase, the architecture of the multi-agent system
will be defined. Each component of the architecture isdesigned respectively.
5) System Implementation and DevelopmentIn the last stage, low-level implementation will be
carried out.
To demonstrate the practicability of the proposed goal
autonomous agents, multi-agent systems and goal-orientedmodeling methodology, we have developed a toolkit for
constructing intelligent agents based on Goal Net [5]. A
case study is briefed in the next section.
3. Agent Mediated Grid Services
Providing peer-to-peer resource and service sharing
under the open grid services architecture is a wide knownchallenge. A number of initiatives to apply agents in gridshave appeared in recent years [2].
Based on Goal Net, a multi-agent system (MAS)
infrastructure in Grid is proposed to facilitate various gridservices such as service advertisement, service discovery,service negotiation and service delivery functions in a
service oriented grid environment. In short, this
infrastructure is called Service-oriented Agent Grid(SAG). Therefore issues such as how to model, identify,organize, and manage these grid agents need to be
addressed.
Following we show how to model (where is it) and
construct SAG, a layered, decentralized peer-to-peer agent
mediated grid service architect ure for service-oriented grid
using Goal Net. From service-oriented view, there aremainly two kinds of agents in SAG: Marketing Agentsand Service Agents. The goal of a Marketing Agent is toprovide services (supported by the backend applications)to service consumers. The goal of a Service Agent is toobtain services on behalf of its client (front end
applications) from service providers. The Marketing
Agents and Service Agents are expected to representservice providers and service consumers, negotiate witheach other autonomously. They also need to collaborate to
provide services in a complex and dynamic grid
environment. These goal oriented analysis forms a GoalNet. Using Goal Net, an agent hierarchy can be furtherderived in requirement analysis stage.
In this agent hierarchy, different types
service/marketing agents are to be constructed for themanagement of the distributed and autonomous resources,discovery of computing services, and selection of services
etc., which forms an MAS infrastructure in the Grid, i.e.
agent grid. The agent grid enables the system toautonomously adapt to users computation needs and the
dynamic resource environments. A prototype has been
implemented in the Nanyang Campus Grid.
In summary, Goal Net not only models the complex
goal of grid service agents but also presents a goalhierarchy from which a multi-service-agent system
infrastructure can be derived. It provides a systematicmethod for modeling the complex goal of grid serviceagents, decomposing the goal hierarchy into multiple subgoal hierarchies, identifying agents, assigning goals for
each individual agent, and coordinating agents towards the
common goal.
4. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented a goal oriented
modeling methodology for modeling and designing agents
and multi-agent systems. Agents that are modeled with the
proposed goal model, Goal Net, not only present behavior
autonomy but also present goal autonomy. An example on
agent mediate grid services is discussed to show thepractice of proposed mythology. Goal Net, is used notonly to model individual mediator agents e.g. Marketing
Agent and Service Agents, but also to model, identify,
derive, organize and coordinate multi-agent systems in thecomplex grid environment. The proof-of-idea prototype
shows that the proposed goal oriented agent modeling
methodology is not only theoretical but also practical.
References
1. Bonifacio M., et. al., “ Toward a Model of Goal
Autonomous Agent”, AAMAS 02: Proc. 3rd Int. Conf.
on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems ,
New York, USA, July, 2004, 2002.
2. Foster I., Jennings N. R. and Kesselman C., "Brain
meets brawn: Why Grid and agents need each other"AAMAS04: Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems ,N e wY o r k ,U S A ,
July, 2004.
3. Nwana H. and Ndumu D., “A Perspective on
Software Agents Research”, Knowledge Engineering
Review , Vol. 14, No.2, pp. 1-18, 1999.
4. Odell, J., "Objects and Agents Compared," Journal of
Object Technology , Vol 1, Number 1, May, 2002.
5. Shen Z. Q. and Gay R., ”Goal-Based Intelligent
Agents”, International Journal of Information
Technology , Vol 9, No. 1, pp. 19-30, 2003.
6. Zambonelli F., Jennings N. R. and Wooldridge M.,
"Developing multiagent systems: the Gaia
Methodology" ACM Trans on Software Engineering
and Methodology , Vol.12, No. 3, pp. 317-370, 2003.
Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International C onference on Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT’04) 
0-7695-2101-0/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
View publication statsView publication stats
