See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/318019733
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint
Conf erence Paper    in  Smart Inno vation  · May 2017
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-59394-4_23
CITATIONS
0READS
400
3 author s:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
Data Scienc e View pr oject
Multi-ag ent modelling f or Contr ol Support Syst em of Public T ransport  View pr oject
Riadh Ghlala
Higher Instit ute of T echnologic al St udies of R ades, T unisia
8 PUBLICA TIONS    8 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Zahra Kodia
Instit ut Supérieur de Gestion de T unis
10 PUBLICA TIONS    25 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Lamjed Ben Said
Univ ersité de T unis
190 PUBLICA TIONS    1,269  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Riadh Ghlala  on 01 May 2018.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint
Towards Decision Collaboration Along Distributed BI
Process
Riadh Ghlala12, Zahra Kodia Aouina13, Lamjed Ben Said13
1SMART Laboratory, High Institute of Management, Tunisia
2Higher Institute of Technological Studies of Rades (ISETR)
riadh.ghlala@isetr.rnu.tn
3High Institute of Management (ISG)
flamjed.bensaid|zahra.kodia g@isg.rnu.tn
Abstract. Nowadays, we are confronted with increasingly complex
information systems. Modelling these kinds of systems will only be
controlled through appropriate tools, techniques and models. Work of
the Open Management Group (OMG) in this area have resulted in the
development of Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) and
Decision Model and Notation (DMN). Currently, these two standards
are a pillar of various business architecture Frameworks to support
Business-IT alignment and minimize the gap between the managers'
expectations and delivered technical solutions. Several research focus
on the extension of these models especially BPMNDF which aims to
harmonize decision-making throughout a single business process. The
current challenge is to extend the BPMNDF in order to cover business
process in a distributed and cooperative environment. In this paper, we
propose the Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint (MABPMNDF)
which is a novel model based on both BPMNDF and MAS to support
decision-making in distributed business process.
Keywords: BPMN, DMN, BI, MAS, MABPMNDF
1 Introduction
Business Intelligence (BI) is a business management term used to describe
applications and technologies which are used to gather, provide access to, and
analyse data and information about the organization, to help make better
business decisions [1]. This activity of the company is materialized by business
processes aiming to achieve the objectives established by the managers.
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) which is a standard in its eld,
has been announced by the Object Management Group (OMG) in 2006 and is
currently in version 2.0 BPMN since 2011 [2]. This latest version has
introduced several new features to improve the modeling of business processes
with a focus on several aspects such as:
2 Riadh Ghlala, Zahra Kodia Aouina, Lamjed Ben Said
Integration of new elements in the specication (events, gateways, activities,
etc.).
Distribution of business processes using diagrams of collaboration and
choreography.
Automating the business process execution by improving the BPEL XML
based language (Business Process Execution Language)
Decision-making represents another eld of investigation favoring the
improvement of business process modeling. It was also an OMG center interest
and has led to the invention of the Decision Model and Notation (DMN) in
2013 [3]. The valuable contribution of the DMN has encouraged the enterprise
architecture community to cover other aspects of decision-making in business
process. The challenge raised in several kinds of business process and especially
in a BI process is to eectively manage decision-making in a case of distributed
and communicating processes. In this context, the Multi-Agent System is
considered as a suitable choice to model a solution allowing to satisfy this kind
of need. This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 overviews the related
work about decision-making and collaboration in business processes. Section 3
argues the choice of Multi-Agent Systems as decision-making modelling
solutions in distributed business processes. Section 4 presents our approach
that is the Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint (MABPMNDF). Section 5
will be devoted to highlights the contribution of MABPMNDF in
decision-making during BI process. Finally, we summarize the presented work
and outline its extensions.
2 Decision-Making and collaboration in Business Process:
Related Works
2.1 BPMN and Decision-Making
A literature review on decision-making and its relationship to business
processes showed a progression in dealing with decision. Indeed, the rst
preoccupation was concentrated on the separation between decision-making
modelling and process modelling [4, 5]. Research in this eld are based on the
collection, modelling and integration of business rules in business processes [6,
7]. This work is crowned in the industrial world by DMN [3] which has become
a standard in modelling decision-making in business process [8]. The second
focus is the serialization of business rules and automation of its processing and
its exchange [9, 10]. Several open-source and proprietary software [11{14]
appeared and are in competition to implement both of BPMN and DMN
standards based on BPEL and FEEL languages [2][8]. According to OMG,
business processes are modelled through two standards [8]: Business Process
Model and Notation (BPMN) and Decision Model and Notation (DMN). The
rst is used to represent the various tasks and their relationships. The second
supports decision making in the business process. Figure 1 shows an excerpt
from a BI process in which we use these standards to model decision making at
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint 3
Fig. 1. Using BPMN and DMN in BI process
the data extraction task. The BPMN standard: it is the substrate for modelling
business processes. It allows to represent graphically the company's activities
to ensure better collaboration between managers and IT engineers [2]. The
example given in Figure 1 describes the ETL software selection task in a BI
process. The decision-making is delegated to DMN [3] to work around the
issue. The DMN standard: it is a BPMN add-in. It is structured in two distinct
parts: (i) Decision Requirements Diagram containing the decision to study,
business knowledge models, input data and knowledge source; (ii) Decision
Logic which is represented by a decision table that can be converted into FEEL
scripting language (Friendly Enough Expression Language) [8]. Thanks to this
marriage between the BPMN and the DMN, decision-making in business
processes has become an unquestionable acquis. This fact encouraged
researchers to go further in the mastery of decision-making in business
processes. Issues such as harmonization, uncertainty and collaboration of
decision-making are currently top-level topics around decision-making in
business processes. Figure 2 describes the BPMNDF [15], a model already
proposed to ensure decision-making harmonization throughout the business
process. Even if it is a collaboration between the phases of a single process and
not a real distributed process or a set of communicating processes, BPMNDF
[15] represents a rst step towards collaboration in decision-making. It is a
coupling of a BPMN with a novel DMN version based on additionally Decision
Repository (DR) and Decision Memorization /Decision Regard (DM/DR)
Algorithm responsible for managing the repository.
2.2 BPMN and collaboration
The BPMN has provided support for collaboration since its preliminary
releases. Indeed, the modeling of this need was simulated in BPMN 1.0 using
swimlanes [2] whereas BPMN 2.0 introduced new diagrams according to the
nature of this collaboration [2]. The new BPMN 2.0 diagrams are:
orchestration diagram, collaboration diagram, choreography diagram and
4 Riadh Ghlala, Zahra Kodia Aouina, Lamjed Ben Said
Fig. 2. BPMNDF[15]
conversation diagram. We are interested in our research by the two diagrams:
orchestration and collaboration. The rst one is the BPMN Orchestration
Diagram. This diagram depicting a sequence of coordinated activities from a
single control center. It can be improved by introducing the swimlanes to
highlight the organizational aspect of the process. In this case, the problem of
the collaboration of decision-making in the business process does not arise
because it is not a real distributed process. As shown in Figure 1, the DMN
perfectly supports decision-making at the task level and as shown in Figure 2,
BPMNDF [15], enhances decision-making through harmony along the process.
The second one is the BPMN Collaboration Diagram. It is a diagram
represents interactions between two or more processes, where each individual
process reects a person, role or a system. In this case, we need a new
approach to manage decision-making in such a distributed and collaborative
environment. An extension of the DMN is required to support not only
decision-making at the task level, not also just the harmony of decisions
throughout a single process but the challenge is to support decision making in
multiple collaborative processes.
3 Decision-Making: From Support to Collaboration in
Business Process
3.1 Decision Collaboration Necessity in Business Process
Collaboration is a natural need in business processes. The task of
decision-making is, perhaps, the task most concerned by this collaboration.
Because of, on the one hand the inuence of the previous decisions on the
current decision and on the other hand the impact of the current decision on
the rest of the process. In each system, collaboration is governed by approaches
that take into consideration organizational, technical, safety and performance
aspects. In our research, the current challenge is how to combine the two
diagrams: DMN and collaboration diagram to support decision making in a
collaborative environment. In this paper, we propose an MABPMNDF model
based on Multi-Agent Systems to meet this need.
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint 5
3.2 Multi-Agent Systems as modelling solution
A Multi-Agent System is a set of software agents that interact to solve
problems that are beyond the individual capacities or knowledge of each
individual agent [16]. Objectives of this cooperation can be: achieving
individual or common goals, labour division, task allocation, conict avoidance,
maximum reward, system integration, maintaining system functionality, system
coordination, knowledge and information acquisition and/or sharing, collective
intelligence. In our research, we are interested by the collaboration of
decision-making. A goal perfectly ensured by Multi-Agent Systems. Several
typologies of Multi-Agent Systems can be envisaged depending on the degree
of synergy between the agents that contain it. Figure 3 shows a classication of
these typologies based on criteria such as interdependence, communication and
uncertainty. In this paper, we propose a novel Multi-Agent based model to
Fig. 3. Cooperation typology [17]
support decision-making in business processes considered as collaborative,
communicating and deliberative Multi-Agent Systems.
4 MABPMNDF Model
4.1 MABPMNDF Presentation
Decision-making in a business process is always based on business rules stored
in a repository. The challenge raised by our proposed model is to ensure
ecient management of this repository in a collaborative environment.
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint MABPMNDF is a Multi-Agent Based
System (MABS) which aims to give new functionalities to business process
designers in order to support decision-making in a distributed and
collaborative environment. It is an extension of the BPMNDF [15], a model
that ensures only the harmony of decision-making between phases throughout
a single business process. Figure 4 shows a sympathetic description of this
model with its dierent agents around a fundamental component of the system
which is the Business Rules repository.
6 Riadh Ghlala, Zahra Kodia Aouina, Lamjed Ben Said
Fig. 4. MABPMNDF
4.2 Agents Description
The study of the agents of this model makes it possible to classify them according
to two characteristics:
The role of the agent which may be an administrative agent belonging to
the management subsystem or a business agent belonging to the design
subsystem.
The degree of involvement of the business agent in the process through the
privileges granted to it.
Management Subsystem Agents: The administration tasks of the model
represent a crucial mission to ensure collaboration in a distributed business
process. Thanks to agents in this management subsystem, we succeed in
mastering the management of the repository, strengthening the reliability of
business rules, controlling the security aspect and following versioning. We
identify two types of agents in this subsystem:
Validation Agent: It is the main agent of the system. It oversees the overall
operation of the business-side system and delegates technical
administration tasks such as system initialization and account management
to the administrator agent
Operator Agent: It is a technical agent. It plays an intermediary role
between the validation agent and business agents. The administrator agent
is responsible, under cover of the validation agent, for the addition,
modication and suppression of a business agents. It is responsible also for
changing roles of these agents by the granting or denying their privileges.
Finally, it enables and disables historical or contextual versions of the
repository according to the needs.
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint 7
Design Subsystem Agents: Decision-maker is called upon to accede to
business rules stored in the repository in order to rationalize his decision. It
can eventually add new rules to the repository or propose changes to existing
rules. A member wishing interact with the deposit is considered as a business
agent. All agents in the design subsystem are business agents. Depending on
the degree of its involvement in the business process, the business agent can be
a modelling agent or a transactional agent.
Transactional Agent: is an agent whose only privilege is the read-only access
to the repository in order to masters the decision-making task in business
process.
Modelling Agent: is an agent with more privileges than a transactional
agent. It has business rule denition privileges such as adding, modifying or
dropping. It collaborates with the transactional agents to enrich the deposit
The overlap between the business agents and the administrative agents is possible
although it is not recommended. Indeed, we can have members ensuring at the
same time the business tasks and administration of the model.
4.3 MABPMNDF Message Protocol
Figure 5 shows an excerpt of the MABPMNDF message protocol via a UML
sequencing diagram. It species the sequence of messages exchanged between
the dierent agents of our model in order to request a new business rule.
Fig. 5. MABPMNDF Message Protocol
4.4 Deployment modes
In this section, we describe the dierent scenarios for using our model. The
strategy is determined according to several parameters regardless of technical
options like (i) infrastructure that can be desktop, web or mobile development
(ii) business rules serialization that can be with XML, JSON, relational model or
NoSQL databases (iii) user interface requirements that can be batch, interactive
or near real-time. We insist in this rst release of our model on the establishment
8 Riadh Ghlala, Zahra Kodia Aouina, Lamjed Ben Said
of the repository. This parameter is relative to the creation and refresh of the
repository. Two approaches are possible: an upstream creation or a downstream
creation.
Upstream: The process starts from a pre-built repository and dispatch it to
the dierent members of the team. Any changes will only take eect on the next
release that will be released to the team. A rather cumbersome and less realistic
approach for this is rarely used in information systems. The versioning concept
in this approach reects a repository update.
Downstream: The process starts from an empty repository and feed it
gradually. The repository is built over time and it is transformed into a
patrimony of the company. A realistic and very frequent approach in most
information systems. The visioning concept according to this approach is seen
as a contextualization between the type of business process and the repository
used.
5 Simulation of a BI process with MABPMNDF
5.1 Study example
In this section, we provide an illustrative example of our MABPMNDF model
applied to a BI process. The process encompasses the working of a start-up
specialized in information systems engineering and specically in the
integration of business intelligence solutions. Knowing that a Corporate BI
process is typically subdivided into three sub-processes: (1) data warehousing,
(2) deductive and predictive analysis, and (3) reporting to develop reports,
dashboards and scorecards. The studied company is then composed of three
teams involved in this business process that can be described as a distributed
process. In fact, each sub-process has its own geo-temporal parameters. Figure
6 illustrates the BI process using the BPMN collaboration diagram. The
purpose of the simulation study is to understand how cooperation between the
dierent members of the dierent teams is managed in terms of
decision-making in the business process. This objective is materialized by the
ecient management of the repository containing the business rules.
5.2 Mapping between MABPNDF and BI Process
The application of our MABPMNDF model on the chosen process requires in
the rst step an initialization phase triggered by a member of the company. This
member will be considered later as the validation agent who will oversee the
entire process of his management and design side. This initialization is carried
out by another member of the company. The last will be considered later as the
operator agent. The mission of the operator agent is to implement the repository
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint 9
Fig. 6. BPMN collaboration diagram for BI process
with the upstream or downstream strategy depending on the validation agent's
setpoint. Thereafter it will be available to the other team members to act as
the intermediary between them and the validation agent in order to respond to
their requests for registration, proling and activation of a particular version of
repository. Each member of the team involved in the design of the BI process
is considered as a business agent. It begins with being a transactional agent
with read-only access on the repository. In the case of a need for a new BR or
the modication of an existing BR. The transactional agent must collaborate
with a modeling agent with such privileges to ensure its need. Let us note that
a transactional agent can express its desire to become a modeling agent. If the
request is accepted it will have additional privileges like the denition of business
rules and not only their use.
5.3 Benets of MABPMNDF on decision-making in business
process
The assignment of our model is to facilitate and supervise at the same time the
transactions around the repository of business rules for a rationalized
decision-making in the BI business process. Indeed, a BI business process
designer, whatever is his position in the process, can refer to reliable business
rules to elaborate his decision. These decisions cannot be contradictory or
unrealistic, because they are based on already validated rules. This takes into
consideration the harmony of decisions throughout the process and
collaboration between the various stakeholders. Contributions of the
MABPMNDF in a BI process are several. We note especially:
Avoiding inappropriate choices about technologies and tools used. Indeed,
the repository can warn the designer through a business rule to streamline
its ETL selection to be portable with its data sources.
The focus on the principle of 'what we can do and not on what the
business manager wants to do'. For example, we do not accept the choice of
10 Riadh Ghlala, Zahra Kodia Aouina, Lamjed Ben Said
designing near-real time dashboards if we have a mechanism for extracting
and refreshing data with widely spaced periodicity.
Transforming the BI process into an adaptive way by using business rules
derived from the real world with local parameters of the subsystem and not
inappropriate business rules with generic parameters. Thereby, we must take
into account the capacities and limitations of the infrastructure used in terms
of memory and processing when implementing multidimensional structures
or when choosing data mining algorithms.
Strengthening the agility of the BI process by studying the feasibility of a
suitable choice, even if the repository contraindicates it, with the
modication of an existing business rule. The above-mentioned example
concerning the choice of a near-real time dashboard can be achieved by
playing on the business rule controlling the extraction of the data from the
sources to the data warehouse. Therefore, we win a highly-requested
feature in business processes that is the agility of IT solutions to support
the business layer needs in information systems. We hope that our model
MABPMNDF contributes on the dream of business-IT alignment.
Using versioning feature to manage BI processes in dierent contexts or with
dierent modes: legacy mode and current mode. This feature is very handy
when we design the same process with various levels of requirements or when
we are called to attending inherited processes in the company.
These various requirements represent serious challenges for the success of BI
projects. Thanks to MABPMNDF, these gaps may be increasingly controllable
and BI projects could be more likely to achieve their objectives.
6 Conclusion and Future Works
In this article, we argue that decision-making in a business process is always
based on business rules. A good perception and management of these business
rules widely improve decision-making in business process. This task is further
complicated in a distributed environment. Our contribution is in the context of
the work of the OMG, in particular of their BPMN and DMN standards. We
propose the MABPMNDF, which is an extension of BPMNDF, a model already
proposed in the literature in order to improve decision-making by emphasizing
the harmony of decisions throughout a single process. MABPMNDF is designed
to support decision-making cooperatively in a distributed environment using the
Multi-Agent paradigm. To illustrate the contribution of our model, a simulation
of the MABPMNDF is applied on a BI process to show its benets in decision-
making in business process. Our future work will be scheduled on three axes.
First, the implementation of a Framework to apply the MABPMNDF model.
The second step is to validate this approach with case studies in the industrial
environment. The third axis is the improvement of this approach by focusing on
several aspects around the repository as more security through certicates, more
availability by applying the mechanisms of backup and replication and ultimately
more performance through optimization of business rules serialization.
Multi-Agent BPMN Decision Footprint 11
References
1. Sperka, R. Agent-based Design of Business Intelligence System Architecture.
Journal of Applied Economic Sciences, Volume VII, Issue 3(21), Fall 2012, Spiru
Haret University: Romania, ISSN 1843-6110, pp. 326-333
2. Object Management Group, Business Process Modeling Notation Specication 2.0,
2011, Available from: http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF/
3. Object Management Group, Decision Model and Notation 1.0, 2015, Available from:
http://www.omg.org/spec/DMN/1.0/PDF
4. Batoulis, K., Meyer, A., Bazhenova, E., Decker, G., Weske, M.: Extracting decision
logic from process models. In: Zdravkovic, J., Kirikova, M., Johannesson, P. (eds.)
CAiSE 2015. LNCS, vol. 9097, pp. 349366. Springer, Heidelberg (2015)
5. Biard, T., LeMau, A., Bigand, M., Bourey, J.P.: Separation of decision modeling
from business process modeling using new Decision Model and Notation (DMN) for
automating operational decision-making. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Bnaben, F.,
Picard, W. (eds.) PRO-VE 2015. IFIP, vol. 463, pp. 489496. Springer, Heidelberg
(2015)
6. Kluza, K., Nalepa, G.J.: Towards rule-oriented business process model generation.
In: Proceedings of the Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information
Systems, FedCSIS, Krakw, Poland, 811 September 2013, pp. 939946 (2013)
7. Bajwa, I.S., Lee, M.G., Bordbar, B.: SBVR business rules generation from natural
language specication. In: Articial Intelligence for Business Agility. AAAI Spring
Symposium Series (SS-11-03), pp. 28 (2011)
8. Taylor, J., Fish, A., Vincent, P.: Emerging Standards in Decision Modeling - An
Introduction to Decision Model & Notation in iBPMS Intelligent BPM Systems:
Impact and Opportunity. Future Strategies Inc., Brampton (2013). ISBN 978-0-
9849764-6-1
9. Benson, T., Grieve, G.: UML, BPMN, XML and JSON. chapter in Principles of
Health Interoperability, Part of the series Health Information Technology Standards
pp 55-81. Springer 2016.
10. Ouyang C, Dumas M, ter Hofstede AHM, van der Aalst WMP (2006) From BPMN
process models to BPEL Web services. In: Proceedings of the fourth international
conference on web services, pp 285292
11. Camunda workow and business process management, Available from:
https://camunda.org/
12. Signavio Decision Manager, Available from: http://www.signavio.com
13. Decision Management Solutions: DecisionsFirst Modeler, Available from:
http://decisionsrst.com
14. The Digital Enterprise Suite, Available from: http://www.trisotech.com
15. Ghlala R., Kodia Aouina Z., Ben Said L. (2016) BPMN Decision Footprint:
Towards Decision Harmony Along BI Process. In: Dregvaite G., Damasevicius
R. (eds) Information and Software Technologies. ICIST 2016. Communications in
Computer and Information Science, vol 639. Springer, Cham
16. Potiron, K., El Fallah Seghrouchni, A., Taillibert, P.: Multi-Agent System
Properties, Chapter From Fault Classication to Fault Tolerance for Multi-Agent
Systems Part of the series SpringerBriefs in Computer Science pp 5-10, ISBN: 978-
1-4471-5045-9, Springer 2013.
17. Glavic, M.: Agents and multi-agent systems: a short introduction for power
engineers. Tech. rep., University of Liege Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science Department (2006)
View publication statsView publication stats
