ELSEVIER European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 EUROPEAN 
JOURNAL 
OF OPERATIONAL 
RESEARCH 
Negotiation support systems: A multi-criteria and multi-agent 
approach 
Bernard Espinasse *, Guy Picolet, Eugene Chouraqui 
DIAM-IUSPIM, Uniuersitd Aix-Marseille Ill, Campus Scientifique de Saint J&g~me, 13397 Marseille, Cedex 13, France 
Abstract 
This research concerns the development of an Negotiation Support Systems (NSS) based on a multi-criteria conceptual 
framework of the negotiation and developed according to a multi-agent architecture from Distributed Artificial Intelligence 
(DAI). A first prototype of such a system, NegoclAD, has already been developed [8], but the weakness of its assistance to 
the negotiation process have led us to revise the conceptual framework in order to define a more relevant assistance to the 
negotiation process. This paper presents this new conceptual framework defined in order to develop a new prototype. First, 
we point out the originality of our multi-criteria and multi-agent approach, the general architecture and the limitations of 
NegoclAD. Then we present the new multi-criteria conceptual framework mainly based on the definition and the use of 
projection plans (group Gaia plans) emerging from principal component analysis (PCA) already proposed in a single 
decision maker context in extension of the Promethee method. In the next part, we develop the possible levels of use of these 
plans during the negotiation process and the type of assistance provided to the mediator. This assistance is mainly based on 
the elaboration and the interpretation of group Gaia plans for which we propose a set of interpretation rules and the outline 
of a method to make use of these rules for a relevant support to the mediator in the management of the negotiation process. 
Finally, we conclude on the perspectives of our future researches and developments tbr the new generation of our prototype 
in a multi-agent architecture context. © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. 
Keyword~: Negotialion; Decision support systems; Negotiation support systems; Multi-criteria analysis; Multi-agent systems; Distributed 
artificial intelligence 
1. Introduction 
Negotiation processes are often characterised by 
conflicts of interest and a non-cooperation, the exis- 
tence of various sources of information and rules, 
proper to each negotiator (that one is not willing to 
• Corresponding author. E-mail: bernard.espinasse@iuspim.u- 
3mrs.fr divulge or share), a mutual lack of confidence, a 
doubt about the sincerity and the good will of the 
other actors, and finally, exchanges of the 'bargain- 
ing' type. 
The concept of Negotiation Support System (NSS) 
is as recent as that of Group Decision Support 
System (GDSS) [8]. It has taken such an importance 
in the scientific community that the title NSS has 
merged with that of GDSS to make only a single 
field of research: the GDNSS [6]. Several NSS have 
already been developed [13]. A NSS permits to join 
0377-2217/97/$17.00 © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 
PII S0377-22 1 7(97)001 27-6 

390 B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
different points of view and positions, to conciliate 
differences and to suggest solutions for compro- 
mises. It allows to increase the quality and the 
acceptability of a negotiated agreement, to improve 
the quality of relationships during the negotiation 
and finally, to increase the capacity of negotiators to 
solve the conflict. 
As a communication support tool between the 
opposing negotiators, an NSS reduces the emotional 
aspect that often characterises exchanges and makes 
barriers due to influences and/or to inhibitions fall. 
As an advanced tool in the negotiation process, it 
helps members of the group to identify their true 
interests, to place them in the context of the con- 
frontation with the other interests and to help each to 
evaluate the importance that they grant to their ex- 
pectations. Being neutral and third parties, these 
systems allow to develop scenarios taking into ac- 
count the different positions. 
Our research focuses on the development of NSS 
based on multi-criteria models of the negotiation and 
developed according to a multi-agent architecture 
from Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAD. A first 
prototype of such a system, NegoclAD, has already 
been developed [9]. In the first part of this paper, we 
point out the originality of our multi-criteria and 
multi-agent approach, and we present the conceptual 
framework, the general architecture and the limita- 
tions of our existing NegoclAD prototype. In the 
next part, we develop the new multi-criteria concep- 
tual framework that we have adopted for the devel- 
opment of our new prototype. This framework is 
mainly based on the definition and the treatment of 
plans which come from Principal Component Analy- 
sis (PCA). Such plans have already been proposed in 
a single decision maker context in extension of the 
Promethee method. We develop in the next part the 
possible levels of use of these plans during the 
negotiation process and the type of assistance pro- 
vide to the mediator. This assistance is mainly based 
on the elaboration and the interpretation of group 
Gaia plans for which we propose a set of interpreta- 
tion rules and the outline of a method to make use of 
these rules for a relevant support to the mediator in 
the management of the negotiation process. Finally, 
we conclude on the perspectives of our future re- 
searches and developments for the new generation of 
our prototype in a multi-agent architecture context. 2. A multi-criteria and multi-agent approach of 
the negotiation: NegocIAD 
An NSS is often constituted by a set of models 
and a metamodel federating the exchanges between 
these models. In general, one associates a specific 
model to each sub process of the global process of 
negotiation. These models concern in particular tech- 
niques and models from the theory of games. Our 
research focuses on the development of NSS based 
on a multi-criteria conceptual framework of the ne- 
gotiation and developed according to a multi-agent 
approach. We have already developed a prototype of 
such a system, named NegoclAD [9]. 
2.1. A multi-criteria approach 
The multi-criteria approach of decision support 
aims to widen the reflection, on the choice of solu- 
tions in selection phase [22], in the development of a 
set of criteria [2] and solutions in the design phase of 
Simon's model of the decision process. The multi- 
criteria approach is extremely relevant for the design 
of DSS; the implementation of models and multi- 
criteria techniques allows to design an assistance in 
the phases of design (possible solution elaboration) 
and selection (among these possible solutions) of the 
decision process concerned. Many multi-criteria 
methods have allowed to develop many operational 
DSS [18,19,14]. 
However, a multi-criteria method allowing, for a 
group of decision makers, to apprehend a process of 
negotiation does not currently exist. Therefore, we 
had to develop a multi-criteria method allowing to 
support such a process, and to serve as foundation to 
the development of the first version of NegocIAD 
[9]. This method is largely inspired by the Promethee 
method (Preference Ranking Organisation METhod 
for Enrichment Evaluations) proposed by Brans et al. 
[4] in an unique decision maker context (cf. Appen- 
dices A-D tor an abstract of the Promethee method 
in a single decision maker context). Note that con- 
currently to our research on such a method, other 
researches are being developed, for example at the 
VUB - Brussels [16,17]. 
More precisely, the object of this new method is 
to support a negotiation process allowing a group of 
decision makers to find an agreement on a consen- 

B. Espina.sse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 391 
sual preorder, with the help of a mediator who has to 
manage the negotiation process. We consider a group 
of decision makers d s having to choose among a set 
of actions a j, these actions are evaluated according 
to a set of evaluation criteria c i. The set of criteria is 
the same for all decision makers, we are conscious 
that this is an important restrictive hypothesis. To 
each decision maker is associated an evaluation ma- 
trix, analogous to the matrix proposed by Promethee 
in the single decision maker context. 
The negotiation method we have proposed for the 
development of our first version of NegoclAD is 
defined around several phases which are decom- 
posed in stages [9]: 
Phase 1. Individual evaluation 
stage 1: each decision maker of the group 
elaborates his own evaluation matrix; 
stage 2: for each decision maker, from a flow 
calculation, we calculate an 'individ- 
ual preorder' on the actions; 
stage 3: decision makers and the mediator 
agree on, for example, a margin of 
general negotiation, indicating a 
maximum adjustment rate accepted 
for evaluations and weights of crite- 
ria (for example _+ 10%); 
Phase 2. Collective evaluation 
stage 1: from these individual evaluations, 
the mediator calculates a group ma- 
trix or collective evaluation matrix 
(averages and dispersions); 
stage 2: from this collective evaluation ma- 
trix the mediator establishes a result- 
ing preorder, called 'collective pre- 
order'; 
Phase 3. Conduct of the negotiation 
stage 1: test of consensus: the 'consensus 
threshold' is obtained in reducing the 
flow of the best action of the previ- 
ous collective preorder of the maxi- 
mum adjustment rate (for example 
10%). For each of the decision mak- 
ers, the mediator isolates all actions 
of the individual preorder whose to- 
tal flow is superior or equal to this 
threshold: if one or more actions are common to all decision makers then 
there is consensus; if the consensus 
is not reached, the mediator defines 
from this preorder a threshold of 
consensus; 
stage 2: classification of decision makers: the 
mediator classifies decision makers 
according to their distance from the 
collective preorder; 
stage 3: proposal of adjustments: the media- 
tor indicates to each decision maker 
in what directions (increase or reduc- 
tion) some of his evaluations or 
weightings of criteria would have to 
be adjusted so that a consensus can 
be found; 
During this stage, the mediator may adopt several 
strategies of negotiation. Two possible strategies are 
[9]: 
• Strategy of reinforcement of the collective pre- 
order: to bring the decision maker who is the 
farthest from the consensus, back to the collective 
preorder; 
• Strategy of change to the collective preorder: to 
incite the decision makers closest to the collective 
preorder, to distance from it and to approach 
decision makers farthest from the collective pre- 
order. 
Return to pha.ve 1. Each decision maker adjusts 
(or not) his evaluations and weights in the directions 
suggested by the mediator. 
2.2. A multi-agent approach 
Our NegoclAD prototype is based on the multi- 
criteria method that we have presented above. For 
the development of this prototype we have adopted a 
multi-agent approach, from Distributed Artificial In- 
telligence (DAI) [1,10,11]. NegoclAD is an NSS for 
a group of decision makers, managed by a mediator. 
2.2.1. General architecture 
This prototype has been developed with a multi- 
agent architecture composed of a population of artifi- 
cial agents distributed on different machines dedi- 
cated to decision makers and to the mediator. The 

392 B. l£spinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
decision maker decision 
~kar~ / agent maker 4 
nuediator ~ mediator 
agent ~~ "~'1~ 
decision agent maker 3 agent maker 2 
Fig. l. General architecture of NegoclAD. 
main artificial agents are of a cognitive type notably 
when they are associated to human actors (decision 
makers and mediator); other agents associated to 
criteria, actions, weights are of reactive type. Fig. 1 
illustrates this multi-agent architecture adopted. 
From a technical point of view, NegoclAD has 
been developed using the Objlog language, extended 
to the multi-agent context. Objlog is a self-referring 
language for the development of knowledge based 
systems (Objlog is itself developed in Prolog). It is 
based on frames and permits vertical multiple inheri- 
tance, horizontal multiple inheritance, management 
of exceptions, classification and analogy [7]. Deci- 
sion makers and mediator agents communicate by 
the Ethernet network, an asynchronous communica- 
tion (with or without continuation) supported by 
specific processes developed in C language accord- 
ing to a client-server philosophy. 
2.2.2. A negotiation session with NegocIAD 
The human Mediator initialises the negotiation by 
defining, in consultation with the decision makers of 
the group, the criteria and actions associated to the 
problem. The formulation of the problem being de- 
fined, the mediator communicates it to its artificial 
agent. This agent communicates the problem formu- 
lation to the various decision maker agents. Once the 
problem defined, each decision maker defines his 
evaluation values and his criterion weights and he 
delegates different orders or negotiation strategies to 
his artificial agent. In our prototype, these orders 
concern only the definition of evaluation margins 
and margins of weighting modulations. 
After the first individual evaluation (Phase 1) done by each decision maker, the negotiation process 
can start, managed by the mediator or its artificial 
agent associated, according to the method presented 
above. The mediator agent calculates a collective 
preorder (Phase 2), tests the consensus, ranks the 
decision makers according to their distance from this 
collective preorder and finally propose to decision 
makers agents adjustments in specific ways for their 
evaluations and weightings (Phase 3). As evoked 
above in Phase 3 of the method, at the mediator 
agent level, different strategies of negotiation man- 
agement can be defined. These strategies can be 
sophisticated and enrich the knowledge base of the 
mediator (extent in particular to the concept of be- 
lieD. In our first prototype these strategies are either 
a reinforcement of the collective preorder simple or a 
change of the collective preorder, as already defined 
in the method. 
In response to these adjustment demands ex- 
pressed from the mediator agent, each decision maker 
agent modify its evaluations and weightings (Phase 
1) in the way of adjustment specified by the media- 
tor agent, and in the respect of the negotiation limits 
fixed by its human decision makers associated and 
according to the strategy defined by him. Each deci- 
sion maker agent communicates these new evalua- 
tion and weighting to the mediator agent for the 
calculation of a new collective preorder, a new test 
of consensus, a new decision makers ranking and 
finally the proposition of new adjustments of evalua- 
tion and weighting (Phase 2). 
Thus, the system manages the negotiation in a 
semi-automatic manner, through messages ex- 
changed between decision makers and mediator arti- 
ficial agents, until a consensus is obtained or until 
margins of negotiation are exhausted. In this last 
case, the negotiation fails and the system asks all 
human decision makers to enlarge evaluation and 
weighting margins, to adjust their evaluations be- 
yond the limits of margins that they had fixed or 
suggests to continue the negotiation with a meeting 
with human actors. 
2.3. Summary 
Our experimentations with NegocIAD have shown 
that the multi-criteria approach coupled with multi- 
agent architecture is an worthwhile and operational 

B. Espinasse et al./ European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 393 
way. However, the conceptual framework associated 
to our multi-criteria negotiation method used in Ne- 
goclAD is too poor to define a relevant support to 
the negotiation process. 
Consequently, we have revised our multi-criteria 
conceptual framework in order to supply a more 
relevant support to the negotiation process. We have 
chosen to focus our research on the definition of an 
assistance dedicated to the mediator. The first aim is 
to provide assistance tools to the human mediator to 
help him understand conflict situations and to better 
manage the negotiation process. The second aim is to 
permit the human mediator to delegate a part of 
these tools to an artificial mediator agent. Thus, the 
object of our research is not to study a possible 
support to the decision maker in the negotiation 
process. decision makers have k criteria (belonging to the set 
C) to evaluate these actions and to make their choice. 
We introduce a human mediator M who has to 
manage the negotiation process to reach a consensus 
in this choice. We make the following preliminary 
hypotheses: 
1. the decision makers have agreed on the items aj 
of the actions set A and ci of the set C of criteria 
for evaluate these a); 
2. to each decision maker is attributed a weight w s, 
according to his importance within the group; 
3. each decision maker does not know the evalua- 
tions and the weightings of any other decision 
makers. 
Furthermore, please note: 
3. Conceptual framework for group negotiation 
This new conceptual framework is always based 
on the use of multi-criteria matrices as the main 
vehicle for the negotiation process. We apply various 
interpretative analyses to these matrices, based on 
principal component analysis (PCA) and leading to 
graphic representations which are projections. 
These projections constitute a set of mathematical 
tools offered to the mediator to help him to under- 
stand conflict situations and to better manage the 
negotiation process. The interpretation of these rep- 
resentations permits an analysis of the current situa- 
tion of the negotiation and to propose actions for the 
further conduct of the negotiation. 
The usage of such projections has already been 
proposed in extension of the Promethee method by 
Brans and his team, under the name of 'Gaia Plan', 
in a single decision maker context [5], and in an 
embryonic state for the group negotiation [16] (cf. 
Appendices A-D for an abstract on Gaia plans in a 
single decision maker context). In the following part, 
we develop the mathematical model of our exten- 
sions for a multi-decision makers context and the 
conduct of negotiations. 
3.1. Preorders in group negotiation context 
Given a group of r decision makers having to 
choose one action in a set A of n actions. These • j is the index attributed to actions: A = {a)}, 
j= 1...n; 
• i is the index attributed to criteria: C= {ci}, 
i=l...k; 
• s is the index attributed to decision makers: D = 
{de}, s = 1... r. 
As in a single decision maker context, each deci- 
sion maker is associated an 'individual matrix' of n 
rows and k columns which contains their evaluations 
and weightings. The mediator M has a 'global ma- 
trix' of n rows and k × r columns elaborated with 
all the individual matrices. On the global matrix, 
flows or 'group flows' can be calculated. With these 
flows we can establish a total or partied preorder. 
Note that in a single decision maker context, the 
partial preorder Promethee I points out possible in- 
comparabilities between different actions which re- 
sult from conflicts of criteria; in a multi-decision 
makers context, these incomparabilities can also re- 
sult from conflicts between decision makers. 
The flow for a given criterion is equal to the sum 
of flows of this criterion for each decision maker. It 
is calculated on the set of individual matrices, 
weighted by the weight given to each decision maker. 
If we make the sum of input flows for a criterion c, 
we obtain the same result as if we calculated it from 
the global matrix. Therefore, calculations can be 
made in the same way as in a singlc decision maker 
context. With w~i the weight associated to each 

394 B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
Fig. 2. An example of a group Gaia plan. given by the last column, which represents the out- 
ranking flows given by: 
qb( aj) = L wsq~( aj). 
s=l 
These flows permit to rank the actions according a 
total preorder (Promethee II). 
3.2. Definition of group Gaia plans 
criterion i by the decision maker s, the net flow 
becomes: 
k 
~g(a) = ~ w s ~, w~.il/(n- 1) ~ Psi(a,xj) s=l i=1 j=l 
-- Psi(xj,a). 
Consequently, we can represent the alternatives of 
choice in a space of dimension r, axes of which are 
now, the r decision makers. The decision axis H is 
then the vector coordinates of which are the r weights 
w s. This leads to the group Gaia plan illustrated in 
Fig. 2. 
In order to provide the mediator with an 'intelli- 
gent' support in the conduct of the negotiation, we 
propose to define a set of group Gaia plans. Now, we 
present how, starting with the evaluation matrices of 
all decision makers, we can calculate a relevant set 
of group Gaia plans. 
The net group flow ~bg(a) for a given action a, 
can be defined by: 
k 
~bg(a) - E ws,qSs,(a), 
i=I 
where qbsi(a) identifying the net flow for the action 
a, the decision maker s and the criterion i: 
dpsi(a)= 1/(n-1) ¢". (Psi(a,xj)-Psi(xj,a)). j=l 
(1) 
The net flow of the decision maker s for all criteria 
is: 
k 
= E 
i=1 
These flows enable us to elaborate the global matrix 
G shown in Table 1. The outranking relationship is Like in a one decision maker context, we can 
apply the principal component analysis (PCA), it is 
possible to define plans, group Gala plans, which are 
an interpretation of the information contained in this 
matrix G. 
These Gaia plans are the projection of a cloud of 
points to a two dimensional space. This passage from 
a space of k dimensions to a plan cannot be made 
without an impact on the pertinence of the informa- 
tion processed. We can thus define 8, a ratio of 
pertinence associated to the plan and allowing to 
measure the inertia preserved by the projection on 
axes. The 8 ratio expresses in percentage the quan- 
tity of information preserved. In all cases, the plan 
chosen for the projection is the one that maximises 
its pertinence. The plan is qualified as 'perfect' if it 
preserves 100% of the data during the projection. 
This corresponds to a particular case in which the 
cloud of points before projection is defined in a 
space of dimension 2. This is the case for example 
for a criteria plan where the multi-criteria matrix 
comprises only two. We consider that all plans pre- 
serving at least 80% of information are usable. 
Different projections and consequently different 
group Gaia plans can be defined. We consider six 
relevant group Gaia plans to define and support the 
group negotiation process. 
Table 1 
Global matrix G 
D t ... D~ ... D. 
Action 
al ~bl(a r ) q~s(a I ) qbr(a I ) q~(a I ) 
a i qbi(a i) ~s(a,) qbr(al) ~b(a i) 
a n @l(an) tiPs(an) Cr(a.) ~b(a,,) 

B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
Table 2 
Global unicriterion flow matrix 395 
Decision maker 1 ... Decision maker r 
cl/D 1 ... cj/D I ... ck/D 1 ... cJD, ... cj/D, ,.. ck/Dr 
4).(') ¢k. i(" ) 4)~k(" ) ok, l(') 4>.j(" ) 4>rk(" ) 
al ~b|,(al) ~b,)(al) q~lk(at) q~,l(al) ~rj(~l ) ~rk(al ) 
ai ~bll(ai) ~,j(al) dP,~(ai) dP,)(ai) dPrj(al) dPrk(ai) 
a, 4'2 ,(a~) qhi(an) 4,, ~(a,) ~,,](a°) 4,,~(a,) ~,~(a,) 
3.2.1. Level 1 (P1) decision makers plan 
Fig. 2 illustrated such a plan outcome of the 
example previously defined. This plan has already 
been proposed in [16]. It is interesting because it 
gives a very synthetic comprehension of the negotia- 
tion situation. Indeed, the mediator can identify which 
decision makers are in conflict, and can observe if a 
decision maker coalition exists and also if the con- 
sensus appears easy to achieve or not. 
3.2.2. Level 2 (P2) decision makers plan 
For each decision maker s and each criterion i, 
we have already defined (1) the unicriterion net flow 
4,,~(a): 
= i/(n- i) E (e,,(a,xj)- P,,(xj,a)). j=l 
Consider the set of the unicriterion flow matrix of 
each decision maker. We can gather them in Table 2. 
The only remaining task is now to carry out the 
PCA on the matrix in Table 2. This plan positions 
the actions not any more in relation to the decision 
makers, but in relation to the criteria of all decision 
makers. The actions are positioned in the plan ac- 
cording to the evaluations of all decision makers (see 
Fig. 3). 
D al 
Fig. 3. ixzvel 2 decision maker plan. • ai 
ci/dl 
Fig. 4. Level 3 decision maker plan. 
3.2.3. Level 3 (P3) decision maker plan 
This plan positions the actions seen by all deci- 
sion makers in relation to the criteria of one decision 
maker. We have, therefore, as many level 3 decision 
maker plans as decision makers. The superposition 
of all these plans equals to the level 2 decision 
maker plan (see Fig. 4). 
3.2.4. Criteria plan (P4) 
This plan is obtained by reorganising the informa- 
tion contained in the previous matrices, on the basis 
of single decision maker, unicriterion flows. We 
have, therefore, r similar matrices of the kind shown 
in Table 3. 
We then apply PCA to the matrix in Table 3 in 
order to obtain a criteria Gaia plan without decision 
Table 3 
Matrix concerned by the criteria plans 
c I ... cj ... c k 
ai/d) dPll(ai) ~lj(ai) ~bl k(a,) 
ai/ds ~b~ i(fl i ) d~j(a i) ~,k(ai) 
ai/d, . ~,.l(ai) ~)r.t(ai) ~rk(ai) 

396 B. Espinasse et al./ European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
[ • ai/dK 
~-- -- ci 
Fig. 5. Criteria plan. 
axis. This plan has already been proposed in [6]. We 
obtain as many criteria plans as there are actions. As 
matrix for the weighting of individuals (here the 
ai/ds), we use the weight w, of each decision 
maker, by taking down the sum of the weights to 1. 
Each point in Fig. 5 represents the same action as 
seen by a different decision maker. This space of 
criteria allows to compare each decision maker's 
perception of a given action. This Criteria plan is 
very relevant for the mediator because in the case of 
two decision makers strongly disagreeing on a given 
action, he can identify with this plan if this is due to 
different weights (preferences) or to different percep- 
tions and manage the negotiation process in conse- 
quence. 
3.2.5. Weights plan (P5) 
Here, we seek to measure the criterion importance 
according to the decision makers. We summarise the 
weights attributed to each criterion by each of deci- 
sion makers in Table 4. 
We apply the PCA to the matrix in Table 4 in 
order to obtain a Gaia plan without a decision axis. 
Each criterion is assigned the same weight for the 
PCA (see Fig. 6). 
3.2.6. Coalitions plan (P6) 
This plan permits the comparison of two coali- 
tions, particularly the comparison of a single deci- .° 
dk~ • 
Fig. 6. Weights plan. 
sion maker to the group. We can also generalise the 
method to compare more than two coalitions be- 
tween themselves. For this purpose, we have chosen 
to aggregate information in the form of a weighted 
average. The pertinence of this choice remains to be 
confirmed. Two decision maker coalitions are noted: 
CO] = {Ds}, s = 1... h and CO 2 = {Ds}, s = h'... r 
We calculate the net flow of the first coalition for a 
given action a: 
h 
q~,(a) = E w, qb,(a), 
s=l 
where dp,(a) is the net multi-criteria flow of the 
decision maker s. We obtain Table 5. We apply the 
PCA analysis on the matrix in Table 5 and obtain the 
plan shown in Fig. 7. 
In this section, we have proposed a set of six 
group Gaia plans. In the following chapter, in order 
to provide the mediator with an 'intelligent' support 
Table 5 
Matrix concerned by the coalitions plan 
CO I CO 2 
aE 4h("l) 4'2(a,) 
ai 4)~( a) ~_.(a,) 
a , 4~ ,( a,,) ~( a ,) 
Table 4 
Matrix concerned by the weight plan 
D t ... l), ... D~ 
ct wk~ w~l w,l 
c i wli w. w.i 
C n w :. ws. Wrn a i 
[I 
Fig. 7. Coalitions plan. 

B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 397 
in the conduct of the negotiation, we propose a set of 
interpretation rules and the outline of a method to 
use these rules for a relevant support to the mediator 
in the management of the negotiation process. 
4. Toward an efficient negotiation support system 
Our general objective being to design and develop 
an efficient NSS, we have to define the nature and 
the place of the assistance that shall be supplied in 
the negotiation process. This process can be decom- 
posed into two main phases: problem formulation 
and problem solving phases. 
(1) The problem formulation phase 
This phase concerns the definition of the multi- 
criteria matrix for the group of decision makers, i.e. 
the definition of potential actions, of criteria accord- 
ing to which these actions will be evaluated and, for 
each decision maker, his initial weightings between 
these criteria. During this phase, the mediator's par- 
ticipation may be required to achieve a consensual 
formulation of the problem: the definition of the sets 
A (actions) and C (criteria) to be taken into account. 
(2) The problem soluing phase 
This phase consists in looking for a consensual 
solution, i.e. choosing a consensual action for the 
group. In this step, the mediator's role is fundamen- 
tal: he manages the negotiation process by suggest- 
ing a certain number of concessions, adjustments of 
the various decision makers in relation to their evalu- 
ations of actions, perhaps their weighting of criteria. 
If a consensus cannot be reached, i.e. a consensual 
action cannot be chosen, then it becomes necessary 
to return to the previous phase in order to reformu- 
late the problem. In this reformulation, the role of 
the mediator is very important; the results of the 
preceding resolution phase need to be taken into 
account in order to define new sets of actions and 
criteria, as well as new weightings of criteria by the 
decision makers. An assistance has to be provided to 
the mediator to help him lead this reformulation 
phase. 
The role of the mediator is important during the 
two main phases of the negotiation process. This role is to lead the group of decision makers to choose a 
consensual action, neither good, nor bad for each of 
them, and nevertheless the best possible. By all 
means, the mediator has to bring the group and 
thereby the decision makers to define an evaluation 
of proposed actions which is suitable to find a 
consensus. While the attitude of each decision maker 
of the group is quite subjective, we will assume that 
the mediator is rather objective. This aspect is impor- 
tant because it will allow the mediator to make the 
most of the information available. Consequently, in 
this research, our main objective is the assistance to 
the mediator, particularly during the solving phase of 
the negotiation process. 
4.1. Different support levels giuen to the mediator 
Our research concerns the definition of an assis- 
tance dedicated to the mediator in the resolution 
phase above all and we do not study a possible 
support to the decision maker in the negotiation 
process. In this context, the first aim is to provide 
assistance tools to the human mediator to help him to 
understand conflict situations and their evolution, 
and to better manage the negotiation process and 
even to suggest him apparently pertinent interven- 
tions with the decision makers. A second aim could 
be to permit the human mediator to delegate part of 
these tools to an artificial mediator agent. This sec- 
ond aim will not be treated in this paper. In this 
context we have to define: 
1. the possible levels of intervention of this assis- 
tance during the solving phase of the negotiation 
process; 
2. the type of the assistance our new NSS will 
provide the mediator with. 
As illustrated by Fig. 8, we distinguish four main 
levels of intervention in the solving phase where 
support may be provided to the mediator (cf. Fig. 7): 
• on the first level (level 0) the mediator has de- 
tected a consensus and proposes the validation of 
a privileged action to the decision makers; 
• on the next two levels (level 1, level 2) the 
mediator proposes adjustments to their evalua- 
tions or weightings to the decision makers; 
• on the last level (level 4) the assistance provided 

398 B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
to the mediator focuses on a partial reconsidera- 
tion of the choice of the matrix. 
For these four levels of intervention, we define 
several types of assistance which will be provided by 
our new NSS to the mediator: 
( 1 ) Calculations and visualisations 
As long as the mediator wants to lead the research 
for consensus alone, the role of the system is to 
provide him with a simple way to interpret the 
information contained in the matrices. The assistance 
provided by the system consists presenting its results 
of preorder calculations of groups, as well as the 
visualisation of group Gala plans. 
(2) Local analyses on various plans 
The mediator may want to be assisted by a first 
level of analysis of the information previously pro- 
vided, but not be guided or influenced by a sharp 
analysis or suggested actions. Here, the assistance 
provided by the system is an interpretation of previ- 
ously provided raw information. 
(3) Global analyses and situation diagnostic 
Up to now, the mediator has used a fragmentary 
preorder analysis and plans and synthesised himself 
the information provided by the system. The assis- 
tance provided by the tool focuses on results of analyses stemming from successive calculations on 
different preorders and plans. 
(4) Proposals of interventions for the conduct of the 
negotiation 
This type of assistance is an extension of the 
previous type, it consists of suggesting actions to the 
mediator in order to reach the consensus. The assis- 
tance which will be provided to the mediator by the 
new generation of NegoclAD is largely based on the 
elaboration and the interpretation of group Gala plans 
previously defined. The following paragraphs will 
develop first of all various interpretation rules for 
Gala plans and then the outline of a method for the 
utilisation of these rules for a valuable assistance in 
the negotiation. These rules and this method are 
taken into account in the implementation (currently 
under way) of the new version of our prototype 
NegoclAD. 
4.2. The use of Gala plans interpretation for the 
negotiation 
To manage the negotiation and to lead decision 
makers to a consensus, the mediator has to construct 
a representation of the negotiation situation. The 
Gala plans that we have just defined, more precisely 
their interpretations, can be used by the mediator to 
' I | L.v., Oeflnltlon of the I tf Proposal of modifiealions"~.d 
I I f Pr ev the Level 2 I I I ...... ....... ~ ..d oposa to re- a =te ~ I 
RESOLUTION ~ criteria & preference fonctions~/ [ I 
I ] ,.- ~, ] | ; :Idl- -~' Proposal to re-evaluate ~ I 
| ]:l - ~ the actions J " Level 1 
I ~ Validation of the > ~ Detection of a ~. 
¢onaensual action potential consensus~ 
Level 0 
Fig. 8. The levels of intervention for the tool in the negotiation process. 

B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 399 
Euclidean geometry 
universe 
I Gala plans I I 
Euclidean 
geometry 
discourse Intermediate 
universe Negotiation 
(common sense~ universe 
nterpretation 
Cornraon 
sense 
discourse ~'~[ Partial representation of the ] 
v- [ negotiation I 
Negotiation 
discourse 
Fig. 9. The Gaia plans interpretation process. their properties) can be connected with some objects 
from the negotiation discourse. 
Hypothesis 4. Each plan can be interpreted indepen- 
dently from the others in the context of the type to 
which it belongs: specific plan interpretation. 
Hypothesis 5. The global plan interpretation is ob- 
tained by combination of the specific plans interpre- 
tations. 
elaborate such a preliminary representation. This par- 
tial representation will have to be ref'med and en- 
riched by other information and knowledge sources 
available to him. We are in this research exclusively 
concerned by the elaboration of this preliminary 
representation of the negotiation obtained from the 
interpretation of Gaia plans. 
To elaborate this representation, the mediator 
seeks first of all to elicited information from Gaia 
plans - of geometrical nature - that he has to 
interpret then in the context of the negotiation. The 
cognitive process performed by the mediator consists 
of putting into correspondence two universes, on the 
one hand the universe of the Euclidean geometry and 
on the other hand the universe of the negotiation in 
which the representation we are looking for is devel- 
oped. To each of these two universes is associated a 
specific discourse (cf. Fig. 9). 
The cognitive process of putting into correspon- 
dence these two universes is very complex. How- 
ever, in order to bring an computerised assistance to 
the mediator, we make the following operative hy- 
potheses on the Gala plans interpretation: 
Hypothesis 1. The putting into correspondence of 
the two universes is not direct, there exists at least an 
intermediate universe corresponding to the common 
sense discourse. 
Hypothesis 2. The negotiation discourse is based on 
objects associated to the adopted multicriteria model 
(decision makers, actions, weights, criteria), their 
description and their relationships. 
Hypothesis 3. Gaia plans convey hybrid information 
due to their elaboration; geometrical objects (not Hypothesis 6. It is possible to simulate the plan 
interpretation process according to a declarative ap- 
proach, with 'Interpretation Rules'. 
It is clear-that these hypotheses associated to the 
cognitive process naturally have to be experimentally 
validated. 
4.3. Interpretation rules for Gaia plans 
The interpretation of Gala plans can be very 
complex. Therefore, the previous hypotheses lead us 
to distinguish three group rules of Gaia plan interpre- 
tation allowing to elaborate a preliminary representa- 
tion of the negotiation useful to the mediator. 
4.3.1. General interpretation rules 
These rules are independent of the negotiation 
discourse, and concerns all types of plans. They 
allow to elaborate a meaning of plans in the common 
senses universe (Hypotheses 3 and 6). Premises of 
these rules concern properties of geometrical objects 
and their conclusions concern the common sense 
universe. 
We can distinguish several types of general rules 
related to: the dispersion of points, the dispersion of 
vectors, the length of vectors and finally the lengths 
of the H decision axis (see Fig. 10). 
Furthermore, we have three types of crossed inter- 
pretations according to: the position of the points in 
relation to vectors; the position of the points in 
relation to 7r; and the direction of ~- in relation to 
others vectors. 
4.3.2. Specific interpretation rules 
These rules are associated to each type of Gaia 
plan, and allow to interpret them in the negotiation 

400 B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389--409 
PO~L~ dispersion : 
Q• •• • 
Vectors dispersion : 
Vectors length : COml~romise axis 1] length: 
Fig. 10. Different types of general interpretation rules of Gaia 
plans. 
universe. These rules allow to elaborate the specific 
plan interpretation in the negotiation universe (Hy- 
potheses 2 and 4). Premises of these rules focus on 
the properties interpretations of geometrical objects 
(resulting from general interpretation rules) and their 
conclusions concern the negotiation universe. Spe- 
cific interpretation rules for each plan concern: 
l. decision makers plan, level 1 (PI); 
2. criteria plan (P4): each point represents the same 
action seen by each decision maker. There is no 
decision axis. This criteria plan allows to compare 
the perception each decision maker has of an 
given action; 
3. decision maker coalitions plan (P6); 
4. weights plan (P5); 
5. decision makers plan, level 2 (1°2); 
6. decision makers plan, level 3 (P3): this plan 
positions actions in relation to a decision maker's 
criteria. Therefore, the number of decision maker plans of level 3 is equal to the number of decision 
makers. On this plan, specific interpretation rules 
are equivalent to those defined for the Gaia plan 
in a single decision maker context. 
4.3.3. Global interpretation rules 
These rules use results of the previously men- 
tioned specific interpretation rules in order to elabo- 
rate a preliminary representation of the negotiation 
(Hypotheses 2 and 5). These rules allow the global 
Gaia plan interpretation in the negotiation universe. 
Premises of these rules mainly focus on local plan 
interpretations (resulting from specific interpretation 
rules) and their conclusions concern the negotiation 
universe. 
To illustrate this rules typology we present in 
Appendices A-D some examples of rules illustrating 
how geometrical, specific and common sense knowl- 
edge are used. It is clear that the terminology used in 
the premises and conclusions expression of these 
rules would have to be very precisely defined, what 
we do not make in this paper in particular for its 
concision. This terminology is currently elaborated 
in a context of knowledge acquisition relative to the 
three discourse universes implied in our research 
(Euclidean geometry, common senses and negotia- 
tion universes). 
4.4. Toward an global interpretation method of the 
Gaia plans 
In this section, we introduce a global interpreta- 
tion method which will be used to support a relevant 
assistance for the negotiation. This method is cur- 
Steps 1, 3, 5, 7 
Compare the criteria. ] ~ Detect and solve 
adjustment of • | conflicts and 
evaluations and weights • | incomprehensions 
Step2 I Decision maker plan (P2)I Cdteria plan (P4) I 
Step 8 ] Coalition plan (P6) Weight plan (P5) 
Identify the coalitions, make all 
decision makers of a coalition move 
at the same time in the same direction 
Fig. ] l. Interpretation method for group Gaia plans. Detect differences in 
criteria evalua fions Step 4 
I Step 6 

B. Espinasse et al./ European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389--409 401 
rently used in the implementation (under way) of the 
new version of our prototype NegoclAD and it will 
have to be validated by an experimental implementa- 
tion of the tool. The method we propose is composed 
of 8 steps and illustrated in Fig. 1 1. 
Step 1. Consultation of decision makers plans 
(P1): In the resolution phase of the negotiation 
process, the support to the mediator for a good 
comprehension of the situation must start with the 
consultation of the decision makers plan of level (1). 
Indeed, this plan allows to have a global vision of 
the initial situation and to identify: 
1. which are the decision makers in conflict; 
2. which are the decision makers that are relatively 
close; 
3. which are the favourite actions for each decision 
maker; 
4. which can be a good compromise. 
The analysis begins with the study of the decision 
makers plans. It allows to detect oppositions and 
reconciliations, and to explain problems, to identify 
their causes and to propose actions to solve them. In 
Appendix D we present some global interpretation 
rules which can used for this step. 
Step 2. Consultation of decision makers plans 
(P2): This plan allows to identify the criteria on 
which the decision makers do not evaluate a given 
action in the same way. It allows to compare deci- 
sion makers' criteria, to know on which criteria they 
are opposed and on which criteria they are close. In 
Appendix D we present some global interpretation 
rules which can used for this step. 
Step 3. Return to the decision maker plan ( P1): If 
the suggested modifications have not permitted to 
obtain a consensus the mediator passes on to the next 
step. 
Step 4. Consultation of criteria plan (P4): This 
plan allows to highlight and to solve possiblc prob- 
lems related to a conflict of opinion or comprehen- 
sion. In Appendix D we present some global inter- 
pretation rules which can used for this step. 
Step 5. Return to the decision maker plan ( P1): If 
the suggested modifications have not permitted to 
obtain a consensus the mediator passes on to the next 
step. 
Step 6. Consultation of weight plans (/'5): This 
plan permits to know to which criteria the decision maker attaches the most or the less importance. In 
Appendix D we present some global interpretation 
rules which can used for this step. 
Step 7. Return to the decision maker plan (PI): 
The mediator can observe if the modifications sug- 
gested have permitted to obtain a consensus. If this is 
not the case, he passes on the next step. 
Step 8. Consultation of the coalitions plan (P6): 
This plan essentially allows to constitute groups of 
decision makers with close evaluations. Considering 
this plan rather than the decision makers plans, the 
mediator will be able to bring the coalitions closer to 
each other, without taking the risk of moving the 
decision makers of a same coalition away from each 
other. The possible actions in case of a conflict 
between two coalitions are similar to those described 
for a conflict between two decision makers. The 
purpose here is to obtain a unique coalition, in which 
case the consensus is reached. In Appendix D we 
present some global interpretation rules which can 
used for this step. 
This method will be repeated as long as the 
consensus is not reached. But we can imagine, for 
example, that if after one or two passages, no deci- 
sion maker has accepted to change his evaluations, a 
consensus will never be reached, and the procedurc 
stops there. 
5. Conclusion 
The negotiation process treated in this research 
concerns a group of decision makers, which, under 
the guidance of a mediator, tends to find a compro- 
mise or consensus. This compromise will be ob- 
tained by a game of mutual concessions on evalua- 
tions or criterion weighting adjustments; this is what 
we have called the problem solving phase of the 
negotiation process. If, during the negotiation pro- 
cess, it occurs that a compromise cannot be found, it 
is advisable to return to the phase preceding the 
problem solving phase and to reformulate the prob- 
lem and thus redefine the set of actions and evalua- 
tion criteria which will then be taken into account in 
a new solving phase. 
The conceptual framework for a support to the 
negotiation process which we have proposed in this 
paper, is mainly based on the definition and the 
treatment of plans resulting from Principal Compo- 

402 B. Espinasse et al./ European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
nent Analysis (PCA). The interpretation of these 
plans is complex, and becomes increasingly complex 
with an increasing number of criteria. Therefore, we 
have explicated a set of interpretation rules. 
A new generation of our prototype NegoclAD, 
currently under development, will take into account 
these interpretation rules to assist the mediator dur- 
ing the conduct of the negotiation. We have imple- 
mented the algorithms (as a tool box developed in 
C + + language) permitting to build the different 
plans. The accent is currently putting on the cogni- 
tive formulation of these rules from the terminology 
associated to Euclidean geometry, common senses 
and negotiation discourses, in order to implement 
these rules through artificial intelligence techniques 
(production rules in frames environment). This 
knowledge will be attributed to the artificial agent 
associated to the mediator as an assistant. This agent 
will support the mediator at four levels previously 
defined: calculations and visualisations, local analy- 
ses on various plans, global analyses and situation 
diagnostic, and finally proposals of interventions for 
the conduct of the negotiation. 
Once this support to the human mediator per- 
formed, a new perspective may be to create an 
artificial mediator in charge of the conduct of the 
negotiation. Another research direction can be to 
define a support oriented towards the decision maker. 
This support would be based on the same tools (Gaia 
plans) but different from the one we are proposing 
for the mediator, particularly due to the obvious 
problem of confidentiality. And finally, we can 
imagine to exceed the rigid multi-criteria framework 
(rigid matrices) by taking into account new types of 
exchanges between decision makers (human and arti- 
ficial agents) during the negotiation process. 
We believe it will be possible to absorb this 
complexification in our system NegoclAD, by even 
more using concepts (often very theoretical) that 
currently emerge in the area of multi-agent systems 
[15]. Thus, we think to make more complex the 
agents of our system, agents associated to the media- 
tor but also to human decision makers, in particular 
by providing them with plans and beliefs in order 
that they could develop increasingly sophisticated 
behaviours. These behaviours will enable the agents 
to be very useful assistants in the negotiation pro- 
cess. For example, they will be able to develop strategies, tactics of negotiation. For the implementa- 
tion of these agents, we intend to change our current 
environment (Objlog) to a more advanced multi-agent 
environment like AOP/Agent-K, based on Agent 0 
developed by Shoham [23], with implementation of 
the KQML communication protocol. In this Agent-K 
environment, strongly inspired by the theory of the 
speech acts, agents are endowed with a characterised 
mental state defined by beliefs, obligations and ca- 
pacities. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors want to thank Professors Jean Pierre 
Brans for his constructive comments. They are also 
grateful to Magali Blanc, Cltmentine Catel, Michel 
Pagliai and Erwan Tranvouez for their very efficient 
collaboration. 
Appendix A. Promethee method and Gaia plans 
in single decision maker context 
The Promethee method (Preference Ranking Or- 
ganisation METhod for Enrichment Evaluations) 
proposed by Brans et al. [4] is one of the most recent 
outranking multi-criteria decision support methods 
[3]. These methods have emerged by the end of the 
1960s, under the impetus of Roy who proposed the 
Electre method [21,22]. The Promethee method 
largely uses the notion of 'pseudo-criterion' or 'gen- 
eralised criterion' (introduced by Roy et Bouyssou). 
From the evaluation matrix established by the deci- 
sion maker, after a flow calculation, the Promethee 
method proposes a total or partial preorder on possi- 
ble actions. Having acknowledged this preorder, the 
decision maker can return to his evaluation matrix 
and modify there some of his evaluations, as well as 
the weights he had associated to each evaluation 
criterion. The newly obtained matrix will result in a 
prcorder that may be different from the preceding 
one. With the help of this 'simulation', the decision 
maker will be able to measure the implications of his 
evaluations and weightings on the resulting preorder. 
The Promcalc software (PROMethee CALCulation) 
published by the authors of the method [5], allows to 
lead this simulation process in an interactive manner. 

B. Espinasse et al./ European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 403 
Now, we will take a brief look at the mathematical 
model of the Promethee method, emphasising on 
preorder and Gaia plan calculation. 
A.1. Preorders calculation 
Given a multi-criteria decision problem of the 
type: Max{cl(aj),cz(a j) ..... ci(a~).., c~(aj) with 1 
_<j < n} and A --- {a I ..... aj ..... a,} is the set of the 
n possible actions, which are evaluated according to 
k criteria. The set of criteria is C = {c I ..... c i ..... ck}. 
We consider a particular criterion and we suppose 
that it is to maximise. A comparison by pair of the 
different actions of A, gives us a structure of prefer- 
ence defining the outranking relationship: 
c(a) > c(b) ¢* aPb (a is Preferred over b for 
the criterion c); 
c(a) = c{b) ¢* aIb (a is Indifferent to b for the 
criterion c). 
To each criterion, one associates a 'Generalised 
Criterion' that defines the degrees of preference be- 
tween actions for each criterion and allows to elimi- 
nate scale effects. This 'Generalised Criterion' choice 
is undertaken interactively with the decision maker. 
To that purpose, one has the choice between a set of 
functions of preferences P(a,b) giving the degree of 
preference of a over b for a criterion c. If we set 
d = c(a) - c(b): 
• P(a,b)= 0 if d <_ 0 no preference or indiffer- 
ence; 
• P(a,b) ~ 1 if d >> 0 weak preference; 
• P(a,b) ~ 0 if d > 0 strong preference; 
• P(a,b)= 1 if d>>> 0 strict preference. 
The generalised criterion related to the criterion 
c(-) is then defined by the couple [c(-), P(-,-)]. 
Finally, weights are related to the different criteria, 
showing the importance that the decision maker 
grants to each of them (weights are numbers belong- 
ing to N + and the sum of weight is equal to 1). Once 
the generalised criteria arc associated to each crite- 
rion and the weights are fixed, a multi-criteria prefer- 
ence of a over b taking into account all the criteria 
is defined with: 
k 
7r(a,b) = ~_, w,.P,(a,b), 
i~l where w i represents weights related to each criterion. 
Note that: 
• 7r(a,a) = 0; 
• 0 < 7r(a,b) < 1 for any a,b ~ A; 
• rr(a,b). 1 implies a good global preference of a 
over b; 
• ~r(a,b). 0 implies a weak global preference of a 
over b. 
Thus, for any pair of actions, we have two arcs of 
degree of preference: 7r(a,b) and 7r(b,a). In this 
manner, one builds a valued outranking graph. The 
calculation of the ~" allows to calculate the input 
flow 4,+ and the output flow 4'- for each action a. 
The comparison of these flows allows to define a 
total (Promethee I) or partial preorder (Promethee 
II): 
4,+(a) = 1/(n- 1)- ~ 7r(a,xj), 
j=l 
4,-(a) = 1/(n- 1). ~ 7r(xj,a). 
j=l 
The net outranking flow for action a is: 
4,(a) = 4,+ (a) - 4, (a), 
4'(a) = 1/(n - 1)E~= lwiE 7_ ,(P,(a, xj) - Pi(xi,a)), 
where 4'(a) designates the multi-criteria net outrank- 
ing flow and can be defined as a weighted sum of 
net outranking flows 4'i(a) relative to each criterion 
i: 
k 
4'( a) = E wi4'i( °), 
i=1 
with 4',(a) = l/(n- 1) ~ P,(a,xj)-e,(xj,a). 
j=l 
The action a is as much better as: 
• 4'+(a) is important; 
• 4'-(a) is weak; 
• 4'(a) is important. 
Consider the two total preorders S and I: 
• aS+b ifandonly if 4,+(a)> 4,+(b); 
• aS- b if and only/f 4,-(a) < 4,-(b); 
• al+ b if and only/f 4,+(a)= qS+(b); 
• al - b if and only if 4,- (a) = 4,- (b). 

404 B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
Promethee I is the intersection of these two pre- 
orders: 
a P b if and only if 
a l b if and only if 
aRb aS+ b and aS- b 
or aS+ b and al- b 
or al+ b and aS-b; 
al+ b and al- b; 
in the other cases; 
with: P = Preference; 
I = Indifference; 
R = Incomparability. 
We obtain here a partial preorder where incompa- 
rabilities are possible and where the information is 
reliable. But a total preorder can be obtained with 
Promethee II. 
Promethee H is based only on net flows, removes 
the incomparabilities, but makes the information 
slightly less reliable at the same time: 
a P b if and only if q~(a) > q~(b); 
alb if and only if q~(a) = dp(b). 
A.2. Gaia plan.v calculation 
A development of flow formulae shows that each 
action is characterised by k unicriterion flows (one 
can break down q~(a) in (qrl(a), ~2(a) ..... ~bk(a)). 
Thus, one can construct a matrix of unicriterion 
flows (flows relative to a single criterion), that we 
call 'unicriterion matrix'. The Gaia plan is an inter- 
pretation of the information contained in this matrix. 
It consists of a plan on which the cloud of points 
from the unicriterion flows matrix is projected. This 
projection is such that the loss of information is 
minimal. It is obtained by Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA). A number 6 calculated, giving the 
percentage of information preserved by the Gala C,~ al [ • a4 
Fig. 12. An example of a Gala plan in a single decision maker 
context. 
plan, characterises the quality of the projection. We 
represent in a Gaia plan: 
1. the actions between which to decide; 
2. the selection criteria according to axes of direc- 
tion given by ¢b(a); 
3. the decision axis, given by the projection of the 
weight vector w: (w t ..... w i ..... wk). 
One obtains a cloud of points in the space [~k. 
The projection of this cloud of points in the Gala 
plan is realised by the PCA method. Fig. 12 shows 
an example of a Gaia plan. These Gaia plans graphi- 
cally position actions and criteria. They provide the 
decision maker with some information complemen- 
tary to the classifications of actions between them- 
selves, provided by the methods Promethee I and II. 
These plans are relatively easy to interpret by the 
decision maker and they provide him with very 
relevant information. They enable him to determine 
the action to privilege and to find out about those 
evaluation elements that prevent from bringing out 
an action to privilege. From the previous Gaia plan, 
we can thus deduce the following information: 
1. the evaluations of criteria C1 and C3 tend to 
choose the same actions A1 and A2; 
2. the evaluations of criteria C4 and C5 privilege 
action A3; 
3. the decision axis II, is rather long; this privileges 
those actions situated in the direction of this axis 
Table 6 
Meaning of vectors and points in Gaia plans 
Decision maker plan (1) Criteria plan Coalition plan Weight plan Decision maker plan (2) 
Vector Decision makers Criteria Coalitions Decision makers Criteria 
Point Action An action considered by all decision makers Actions Criteria Decision maker 

B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 405 
and the farthest away from the origin of the plan, 
here the action A4. w 
a2 
Appendix B. General interpretation rules for Gaia 
plans 
Before presenting these interpretation rules, we 
would like to recall the meaning of vectors and 
points in each Gaia plan (see Table 6). 
Rules related to points 
RG1 IF groups of points are observed THEN their 
meanings bring an equivalent satisfaction 
level. 
RG2 IF two points are opposite THEN their mean- 
ings are different. 
Rules related to vectors 
RG3 IF two vectors are close THEN they represent 
equivalent information 
RG4 IF two vectors are orthogonal THEN they 
represent independent information 
RG5 galF two vectors are opposite THEN they 
represent conflicting information. 
Rules related to points and vectors 
RG6 IF a vector is directed to a point THEN this 
point is well explained for this vector. 
RG7 The more a point is opposed to a vector, the 
more this point is badly explained by this 
vector. 
RG8 IF a vector is long THEN the associated 
information strongly differentiates the infor- 
mation represented by the points. 
RG9 IF a vector is short THEN the associated 
information weakly differentiates the informa- 
tion represented by the points. 
Rules 
RGI0 
RGI 1 related to ~ length 
IF ~r is long THEN the decision power of 
the plan is strong, vectors are not too con- 
flicting, the best choices are those the closer 
possible to the decision axis 7, and the 
farthest possible of the origin. 
IF 7r is short THEN the decision power of 
the plan is weak, vectors are conflicting, the 
best choices are those the closer possible to Fig. 13. Examples of use of general interpretation rules on Gaia 
plans. 
the origin, because they do not correspond to 
any extreme. 
Example 1. a I will be preferred over a 2 (RG10) 
(see Fig. 13). 
Example 2. a 2 will be preferred over a I (RGll) 
(see Fig. 13). 
Then, the notions of proximity and distance, of 
short and long have to be clarified. We propose some 
elements (some rules) to approach these notions: 
• two vectors are close IF the covariance (see 
matrix V) is > 0 and high, or IF the angle they 
form is in the interval [0 + m; 90 - m]; 
• two vectors are opposite IF the covariance is 
<< 0, or IF the angle they form is in the interval 
[135 + m; 225- m]; 
• two vectors are orthogonal IF the covariance 
tends to zero, or IF the angle they form is in the 
interval [45 + m; 135 - m]; 
• a vector is long IF the variance is strong, or IF its 
norm is at least equal to 50% m of the average of 
vector norms of the plan; 
• a vector is short IF the variance is small, or IF its 
norm is not more than equal to 50% rn of the 
average of vector norms of the plan; 
• two points are close IF the distance that separates 
them is not more than equal to 50% m of the 
average of distances between all points; 
• two points are distanced IF the distance that 
separates them is at least equal to 50% m of the 
average of distances between all points; 
• a point is close to a vector IF the distance that 
separates the point from the extremity of the 
vector is less than 1/3 m of the norm of the 
vector; 
• a point is far from a vector IF the distance that 
separates the point from the extremity of the 
vector is higher than 1/3 m of the norm of the 
vector; 
• a point is close to a decision axis IF its coordi- 
nate on the opposite axis is not more than equal 

406 B. Espinasse et aL / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-4499 
to 50% m of the average of the same coordinate 
of all points (in absolute value); 
• a point is far from a decision axis IF its coordi- 
nate on the opposite axis is at least equal to 50% 
m of the average of the same coordinate of all 
points (in absolute value). 
... 
It is difficult to quantify such an interpretation 
which is very subjective, and consequently it is very 
difficult to automate. To add flexibility to this inter- 
pretation, we introduce the parameters m and m'. 
These parameters have to be fixed by the mediator 
and/or decision makers before the interpretation. 
Appendix C. Specific interpretation rules for each 
Gaia plan 
RPI.1 
RP1.2 
RP1.3 
RP1.4 
RP1.5 
RP1.6: 
RP 1.7: 
RPI.8: 
RP1.9: 
RPI.IO: (1) Decision maker plan, level 1 (P1) 
IF two vectors (2 decision makers) are 
close THEN decision makers converge to- 
wards the same action; 
1F two vectors are in opposed directions 
THEN the two decision makers are in con- 
flict; 
IF two vectors are orthogonal THEN the 
two decision makers are neither close nor 
far; there is independence; 
IF vectors representing decision makers are 
close to the decision axis THEN they ap- 
proach consensus; 
IF decision makers are in conflict and the 
decision axis ~- is short THEN the good 
actions are those close to the origin of the 
plan; 
IF -n- is short THEN the decision power is 
weak; 
IF decision makers are not too conflicting 
THEN is 7r long and the best actions are 
those situated the nearest possible to the 
decision axis ~-; 
IF 7r is long THEN the decision power is 
strong; 
IF the vector representing a decision maker 
is long THEN the decision maker strongly 
differentiates the actions; 
IF the vector representing a decision maker is short THEN the decision maker weakly 
differentiates the actions; 
RPI.11: IF the decision maker weakly differentiates 
the actions THEN it will be easier to lead 
this decision maker to the consensus; 
RPI.12: IF two projection actions are close THEN 
these actions obtain the same satisfaction 
for decision makers; 
RPI.13: IF two projection actions are distanced 
THEN for a given decision maker an ac- 
tion will be preferred to the other; 
RPI.14: IF a vector (a decision maker) is close to 
an action THEN this decision maker is in 
agreement with this action. 
... 
(2) Decision maker plan, level 2 (P2) 
RP2.1: IF vectors representing the same criterion 
for two different decision makers are close 
THEN these decision makers have the same 
perception of this criterion; 
RP2.2: IF vectors representing the same criterion 
for two different decision makers are dis- 
tanced THEN these decision makers di- 
verge on this criterion; 
RP2.3: IF vectors representing the same criterion 
for two different decision makers are or- 
thogonal THEN this criterion is neither a 
factor of distance, nor a factor of reconcilia- 
tion for these two decision makers; there is 
independence; 
RP2.4: IF a vector representing a criterion for a 
decision maker is long THEN it strongly 
differentiates actions; 
RP2.5: IF a vector representing a criterion for a 
decision maker is short THEN it weakly 
differentiates actions; 
RP2.6: IF criteria are in conflict THEN ~ is short 
and the good actions will be those close to 
the origin of the plan; 
RP2.7: IF 7r is short THEN the decision power is 
weak; 
RP2.8: IF criteria are not too conflicting THEN 7r 
is long and the best actions are those situ- 
ated the nearest possible to the decision 
axis 7r; 
RP2.9: IF 7r is long THEN the decision power is 
strong; 

B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 407 
RP2.10: IF a criterion points to an action THEN this 
action is good for this criterion; 
RP2.11: IF two projection actions are close THEN 
these actions obtain for decision makers the 
same satisfaction; 
RP2.12: IF two projection actions are distanced 
THEN for a given decision maker an action 
will be preferred to the other. 
... 
(3) Criterion plan (P4) 
RP4.1: IF points (the same action) are close THEN 
decision makers have the same perception 
of this action (i.e. more they are in agree- 
ment); 
RP4.2: IF two criteria are in the same direction 
THEN they are similar; 
RP4.3: IF two criteria are in opposed directions 
THEN they are opposite; 
RP4.4: IF two criteria are in orthogonal directions 
THEN they are independent; 
RP4.5: IF The vector associated to a criterion is 
long THEN this criterion strongly differen- 
tiates the vision of the actions for the deci- 
sion makers; 
RP4.6: IF The vector associated to a criterion is 
short THEN this criterion weakly differenti- 
ates the vision of the actions for the deci- 
sion makers; 
RP4.7: IF points (the same action) are distanced 
THEN decision makers have a different 
perception of this action. 
°°. 
(4) Weight plan (P5) 
RP5.1: IF decision makers are distanced on a same 
criterion THEN they have not the same 
perception of this criterion (they do not 
attribute the same importance to this crite- 
rion); 
RP5°2: IF a decision maker vector points in the 
direction of a criterion THEN it has a pref- 
erence for this criterion; 
RP5.3: IF the vector representing a decision maker 
is long THEN criteria are for this decision 
maker strongly different; 
RP5.4: IF the vector associated to a decision maker 
is short THEN criteria are for it weakly 
different; RP5.5: IF criteria (points) are close THEN they are 
evaluated in the same way by decision 
makers; 
RP5.6: IF criteria (points) are distanced THEN they 
are not evaluated in the same way by deci- 
sion makers. 
... 
(5) Coalitions plan ( P6) 
RP6.1: IF vectors representing coalitions are dis- 
tanced from the decision axis 7r THEN 
coalitions will have to make concessions; 
RP6.2: IF vectors are very close THEN the two 
coalitions are in phase; 
RP6.3: IF vectors of coalitions are close to 
THEN they approach a consensus; 
RP6.4: 1F vectors are orthogonal THEN the two 
coalitions are neither close, nor far; there 
is independence; 
RP6.5: IF coalitions are in conflict THEN 7r is 
short and the good actions will be close to 
the origin of the plan; 
RP6.6: IF ~r is short THEN the decision power is 
weak; 
RP6.7: IF coalitions are not too conflicting THEN 
,r is long and better actions are those 
situated the nearest possible to the deci- 
sion axis; 
RP6.8: 1F 7r is long THEN the decision power is 
strong; 
RP6.9: IF the vector representing a coalition is 
long THEN this coalition strongly differ- 
entiates actions; 
RP6.10: IF the vector representing a coalition is 
short THEN this coalition weakly differen- 
tiates actions; 
RP6.11: IF a coalition weakly differentiates actions 
THEN it will be easier to lead this coali- 
tion to the consensus; 
RP6.12: IF two projection actions are close THEN 
these actions obtain for coalitions the same 
satisfaction; 
RP6.13: IF two projection actions are distanced 
THEN for a given coalition an action will 
be preferred to the other; 
RP6.14: IF two vector coalitions are orthogonal 
THEN they are independent (neither close 
to, nor far from a consensus). 

408 B. Espinasse et aL / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 
Appendix D. Global interpretation rules for each 
Gaia plan 
Step 
(P1) 
AI.I: 
A1.2: 
A1.3: 
Step 2. 
A2.1: 1. Consultation of decision makers plans A4.1: 
IF decision makers (A and B) converge 
THEN IF the mediator modifies evaluations A4.2: 
of decision maker A THEN he must also 
modify in the same way the evaluations of 
decision maker B. A4.3: 
IF all decision makers converge THEN the 
consensus is reached and the analysis is 
ended. 
IF the mediator perceives that decision mak- ... 
ers are in conflict on the choice of an action 
THEN he must consult the decision makers Step 6. 
plan of level 2 to compare their criteria. A6.1 : 
Consultation of decision makers plans ( P2 ) 
IF a criterion CI for a decision maker A is 
close to the criterion C1 for a decision maker 
B THEN decision makers A and B are not in 
conflict on the criterion C1. 
A2.2: IF two decision makers are not in conflict on 
a same criterion THEN the mediator must 
not suggest to these decision makers to mod- 
ify their evaluations on this criterion. 
A2.3: IF vectors V 1 and V2, representing the same 
criterion C1 for 2 different decision makers, 
are in opposed directions THEN the media- 
tor must ask the decision makers to modify 
their evaluations on this criterion in order to 
reduce their appreciation gap (the purpose is 
to minimise the angle between the two vec- 
tors). 
A2.4: IF: the vector V 1 representing a criterion C1 
for a decision maker A is long and IF the 
vector V2 representing the same criterion for 
a decision maker B is short THEN decision 
maker B (whose vector is short) will be more 
favourable to a change of his evaluations 
than decision maker A. 
Step 4. Consultation of criteria plan (P4) 
This plan allows to highlight and to solve possible 
problems related to a conflict of opinion or compre- 
hension. A6.2: 
Step 8. 
A8.1: IF the mediator observes that decision mak- 
ers are in conflict on the choice of an action 
THEN he can refer to the criteria plan in 
order to find out if these decision makers 
diverge on preference functions or on their 
perceptions of the criteria. 
IF decision makers have the same perception 
of a given action THEN their evaluations on 
this action must not modified. 
IF decision makers have a different percep- 
tion of a given action THEN the mediator 
has to solve conflicts of opinion or compre- 
hension of decision makers. 
Consultation of weight plans ( P5) 
IF the decision power of the decision makers 
plan is weak THEN the mediator will seek to 
increase it by suggesting the re-evaluation of 
weights granted to criteria by the decision 
makers. 
IF some decision makers do not grant the 
same importance to a criterion (difference of 
weight) THEN a decision maker will be 
more prone to make concessions on a crite- 
rion to which it grants a weak weight that on 
a criterion to which it grants an important 
weight. 
Consultation of the coalitions plan ( P6) 
IF the mediator observes coalitions of deci- 
sion makers THEN he can interpret the plan 
of coalitions. 
References 
[1] H.A. Bond, L. Gasser, Readings in Distributed Artificial 
Intelligence, Morgan Kaufman, 1988. 
[2] D. Bouyssou, Probl~mes de Construction de Critbres, Cahier 
du Lamsade No. 91, Universit6 Paris-Dauphine, 1989. 
[3] D. Bouyssou, P. Perny, Ranking methods for valued prefer- 
ence relations, European Journal of Operational Research 61 
(1992) 186-194. 
[4] J-P., Brans, B. Mareschal, Ph. Vincke, PROMETHEE: A 
new family of outranking methods in multi-criteria analysis, 
in: J-P. Brans (Ed.), Operational Research '84, North-Hol- 
land, 1984, pp. 408-421. 

B. Espinasse et al. / European Journal of Operational Research 103 (1997) 389-409 409 
[5] J-P. Brans, B. Mareschal, The Promcalc and Gaia Decision 
Support System for Multi-criteria Decision Aid, IFORS 
SPCI, Brnges, March 1991. 
[6] T.X. Bui, T. Jelassi, M.F. Shakun, Group decision and 
negotiation support systems, European Journal of Operational 
Research special issue 46 (2) (1990). 
[7] E. Chouraqui, C. Fauchet, Un langage de schtma &endu et 
extensible, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelli- 
gence, Applications and neural Networks, lASTED, Zurich, 
June 25-27, 1990. 
[8] G. de Santis, R.B. Gallupe, A foundation for the study of 
group decision support system, Management Science 33 (5) 
(1987). 
[9] B. Espinasse, T. Panner, NegoclAD: A multi-criteria and 
multi-agent system for negotiation support, International 
Workshop on the Design of Cooperative Systems, INRIA, 
Antibes-Juan-les-Pins, Fiance, January 25-27, 1995. 
[10] J. Ferber, M. Ghallab, Probltmatique des univers multi-agent 
intelligents, in: Teknea (Ed.), Journtes nationales du PRC- 
GRECO Intelligence Artificielle, Toulouse, France, 1988. 
[11] J. Ferber, Les syst~mes multi-agents: Vers une intelligence 
collective, InterEditions, Paris, 1995. 
[13] M. Jarke, T. Jelassi, M.F. Shakun, Mediator:. Toward a 
negotiation support system, Working paper CRIS No. 93- 
GBA No. 85-36(CR), Center for Research on Information 
Systems, New York University, 1985. [14] T. Jelassi, M. Jarke, E.A. Stohr, Designing a generalized 
multiple criteria decision support system, Journal of Manage- 
ment Information System 1 (4) (1985) 24-43. 
[15] S. Labidi, W. Lejouad, De l'intelligence artificielle distribute 
aux syst~mes multi-agents, Rapport de Recherche INRIA No. 
2004, 1993. 
[16] T. Marchant, A. Mosmans, Projet homme-machine pour un 
syst~me d'aide "a la dtcision de groupe, Working paper 
(preliminary version), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), 
1994. 
[17] T. Marchant, B. Mareschal, J-P. Brans, Promethee and Gaia 
in a multi-decision maker environment, Working paper (pre- 
liminary version), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), 1994. 
[18] J.-Ch. Pomerol, (1992), SIAD multicrit~res: Probltmatique et 
exemples, in: Les SIAD 'intelligents': Utilisateurs et 
rtalisateurs, Joumte AFCET du 18 juin. 
[19] J.-Ch. Pomerol, S. Barba-Romero, Choix Multicrit~res dans 
l'Enweprise: Principes et Pratique, Hermts, Paris, 1993. 
[21] B. Roy, J.M. Skalka, Electre IS, aspects mtthodologiques et 
guide d'utilisation, Cahier du l..amsade, Universit6 Paris- 
Dauphine No. 30, 1984. 
[22] B. Roy, M&hodologie Multicrit~re d'Aide ~ la l~cision, 
Economica, Paris, 1985. 
[23] Y. Shoham, Agent-oriented programming, Artificial Intelli- 
gence 60 (1993) 51-92. 

