The TAO of Topic Maps
Finding the Way in the Age of Infoglut
Steve Pepper , Senior Information Architect
Infostream
STEP Infotek
Gjerdrums vei 12
Oslo0486NorwayTel: +47 22021680Fax: +47 22021681Email: pepper@infotek.noWWW: www.infotek.no
Biography:
Steve Pepper is the Senior Information Architect at STEP Infotek, a division of Infostream 
specializin
g in standards-based information reen gineering. He represents Norway on JTC 1/SC 
34, the ISO committee responsible for the development of SGML and related standards, and is convenor of WG 3 (Information association), whose responsibilities include the HyTime and Topic Map standards. A frequent speaker at SGML and XML events around the world, he is the author and maintainer of the “Whirlwind Guide to SGML and XML tools” and co-author (with Charles Goldfarb and Chet Ensi
gn) of the “SGML Buyer's Guide” (Prentice-Hall, 1998).
Abstract:
Topic maps are a new ISO standard for describing knowledge structures and associating them 
with information resources. As such they constitute an enabling technology for knowledge 
management. Dubbed “the GPS of the information universe”, topic maps are also destined to 
provide powerful new ways of navigating large and interconnected corpora.
While it is possible to represent immensely complex structures using topic maps, the basic 
concepts of the model – Topics, Associations, and Occurrences (TAO) – are easily grasped. 
This paper provides a non-technical introduction to these and other concepts (the IFS and BUTS 
of topic maps), relating them to things that are familiar to all of us from the realms of publishing 
and information management, and attempting to convey some idea of the uses to which topic 
maps will be put in the future.1The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
1
1. Introduction
Someone once said that “a book without an index is like a country without a map”.
However interesting and worthwhile the experience of driving from A to B without a map might 
be in its own right, there can be no doubt that when the goal is to arrive at one's destination as quickly as possible (or at least without undue delay), some kind of a map is indispensable.
Similarly, if you are looking for a particular piece of information in a book (as opposed to enjoying 
the experience of reading it from cover to cover), a good index is an immense asset. The traditional back-of-book index can be likened to a carefully researched and hand-crafted map, and the task of the indexer, as Larry Bonura puts it [BON1994] , “to chart[ing] the topics of the 
document and [presenting] a concise and accurate map for readers.”
In 
Troilus and Cressida  Shakespeare used a different metaphor:
And in such indexes (although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes) there is seen
The baby figure of the giant mass
Of things to come at large
but also here there is the same sense of the index replicating, in miniature, the structures of its 
subject, in order to provide a more manageable view of the whole.
Perhaps it isn't surprising that Shakespeare chose not to use the map metaphor. After all, the art 
of cartography was still in its infancy in his time ... and so too were communications. Today the situation is quite different, the sheer speed of modern communications makes accurate and advanced mapping techniques of major importance. One answer to this problem in the realm of transportation is the GPS (Global Positioning System). The answer in the realm of publishing and information management is the new international standard, Topic Maps [ISO13250] .
Up until now there has been no equivalent of the traditional back-of-book index in the world of 
electronic information. True enough, people have marked up keywords in their word processing documents and used these to generate indexes “automatically”, but the resulting indexes have remained firmly within the paradigm of single documents destined to be published on paper. The world of electronic information is quite different, as the World Wide Web has taught us. Here the 
distinction between individual documents vanishes and the requirement is for indexes to span multiple documents, and in some cases, to cover vast pools of information. In this situation, old-fashioned indexing techniques are pitifully inadequate.
The problem has been recognized for several decades in the realm of document processing, but 
the methodology used to address it – full text indexing – has only solved part of the problem, as anyone who has used search engines on the internet knows only too well.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
2
The main problem with full text indexes is their lack of discrimination. They index everything : 
Imagine creating a traditional back-of-book index by taking every single word  in the book, 
removing a couple of hundred of the most obviously useless ones, and then including every 
single usage  of those that remain. Even with some intelligence to allow for inflected forms and 
synonyms the result would be of no practical use whatsoever. And yet this is basically how a web search engine works (no wonder you always get thousands of irrelevant hits and 
still 
manage to miss the thing you are looking for!).
That is why new methodologies are called for, and topic maps provide an approach that marries 
the best of several worlds, including those of traditional indexing, library science and knowledge representation, with advanced techniques of linking and addressing. It is our firm conviction that they will become as indispensable for tomorrow's information providers as maps for the traveller. And once topic maps have become ubiquitous, they will indeed constitute the GPS of the information universe.
2. Knowledge structures and information management
Before looking at the topic map model itself, let us begin by trying to understand the essence of those navigational aids that are familiar to us from the realm of books and paper-based publishing. We'll start with indexes, and go on to consider glossaries and thesauri.
2.1. What is an index, really?
The word “index” means many things, most of which relate to pointing in some way (“index”, 
plural “indicis”, is Latin for forefinger, informer, or sign). The sense we are interested in is that given in the 
Concise Oxford Dictionary  as:
6. Alphabetical list, usu. at end of book, of names, subjects, etc., with references;
A traditional index is in fact a map of the knowledge  contained in a book; it lists the topics 
covered, by whatever name users might be expected to want to look them up, and includes salient (and 
only salient) references to those topics. The following example, adapted from 
[POG1997] , illustrates the basic features:
Madama Butterfly, 70-71, 234-236, 326
Puccini, Giacomo, 69-71soprano, 41-42, 337Tosca, 26, 70, 274-276, 326
The main constituents of this and any index are:
1. an (alphabetical) list of names of topics , and
2. references to occurrences  of those topics
Since our example is taken from a book on opera, the range of topics covers composers, works, 
and other relevant subjects; in a book on another subject, the kinds of topics included would be The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
3
different, but the principle would be the same. Also, the occurrences in the example above are 
referred to by page number, but other mechanisms (e.g. section numbers) might also be envisaged (in fact, references are often called “locators” among indexers).
A more complex example illustrates more features of a typical index:
La Bohème , 10, 70, 197-198 , 326
Cavalleria Rusticana , 71, 203-204
The Girl of the Golden West , see La fanciulla del West
Leoncavallo, Ruggiero
   I Pagliacci , 71-72, 122, 247-249 , 326
Madama Butterfly , 70-71, 234-236 , 326
Manon Lescaut , 294
Mascagni, Pietro
   Cavalleria Rusticana , 71, 203-204
Puccini, Giacomo, 69-71
   La Bohème , 10, 70, 197-198 , 326
   La fanciulla del West , 291
   Madama Butterfly , 70-71, 234-236 , 326
   Manon Lescaut , 294
   Tosca, 26, 70, 274-276 , 326
   Turandot , 70, 282-284 , 326
Rustic Chivalry , see Cavalleria Rusticana
singers, 39-52,
   See also  individual names
   baritone, 46   bass, 46-47   soprano, 41-42, 337   tenor, 44-45soprano, 41-42, 337tenors, 44-45
Tosca, 26, 70, 274-276 , 326
Turandot , 70, 282-284 , 326
There are a number of new features here:
/G7Atypographical conventions are used to distinguish between different types of topic (the 
names of operas are shown in italic);
/G7Asimilarly, typographical conventions are used to distinguish between different types of 
occurrence (references to synopses are shown in bold);
/G7Athe use of see references allows multiple points of entry (by different names) to the same 
topic;
/G7Asee also references point to associated topics;
/G7Asubentries provide an alternative mechanism for pointing out associations between 
different topics (e.g. between a composer and his works, or between supertypes and subtypes).
Indexes can also have yet other features that are not illustrated by our example:The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
4
/G7AA book may contain multiple indexes , for example an index of names, an index of places, 
and an index of subjects. This mechanism provides an alternative to the use of typographic conventions for distinguishing between topics of different types in one and the same index.
/G7ADifferent topic types might also be distinguished through the use of explanatory labels 
following the names, e.g. “Tosca (opera)” and “Tosca (character)”.
/G7AThe locators (page numbers) may contain modifiers that help distinguish between 
different types of occurrence, for example “54n” for a footnote on page 54. Again, this is an alternative to the use of different typefaces.
/G7AThe role played by different types of occurrence might also be shown using a subentry 
mechanism (for example [GOL1990]  makes heavy use of subentries for roles such as 
“clause”, “defined in”, “defined in glossary”, “used in production”, etc.).
The key features of a typical index are thus: topics (identified by their names, of which there may 
be more than one); associations between topics; and occurrences of topics (pointed to via locators). For each of these constructs it is useful to be able to say something about the type, in order to convey more information to the user.
Topics, Associations and Occurrences are also the key constructs in the topic map model 
(hence the title of this paper). But before discussing that model in more detail, let us look briefly at some related navigational aids (glossaries and thesauri), and at one common method of knowledge representation in the domain of artificial intelligence (semantic networks), since those will broaden our understanding of the kind of structures we are dealing with.
2.2. Glossaries and thesauri
A glossary is basically a list of terms and definitions. It can be thought of as a kind of index in which only one type of occurrence is of interest (the one that plays the role of “definition”), and which therefore includes the occurrence inline (instead of pointing to it via a locator). Here is part of the glossary from [POG1997]  (slightly amended for the purpose of illustration):
bass: The lowest of the male voice types. Basses usually play priests or fathers in 
operas, but they occasionally get star turns as the Devil.
diva: Literally, “goddess” – a female opera star. Sometimes refers to a fussy, demanding 
opera star. See also prima donna .
first lady:  See prima donna .
Leitmotif  (German, “LIGHT-mo-teef”): A musical theme assigned to a main character or 
idea of an opera; invented by Richard Wagner.
prima donna  (“PREE-mah DOAN-na”): Italian for “first lady”. The singer who plays the 
heroine, the main female character in an opera; or anyone who believes the world 
revolves around her.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
5
soprano:  The female voice category with the highest notes and the highest paycheck.
Like an index, a glossary may also contain see and see also references to associated topics. It 
can also (as in this case) contain additional information relevant to the term itself, such as its language or pronunciation, but the key elements are the topic names and their definitions.
A thesaurus, on the other hand, emphasizes other aspects of an index. It is basically a network 
of interrelated terms within a particular domain, and although it will often contain other information (such as definitions, examples of usage, etc.), the key feature of a thesaurus is the interrelations, or associations, between terms. Given a particular term, a thesaurus will indicate which other terms mean the same, which terms denote a broader category of the same kind of thing, which denote a narrower category, and which are related in some other way. To continue our example from the world of opera, a thesaurus entry might look as follows:
soprano
definition The highest category of female (or artificial male) voice.
broader term(s) vocalist, singer
narrower term(s) lyric soprano, dramatic soprano, coloratura soprano
related term(s) mezzo-soprano, treble
The special thing about associations in a thesaurus (as compared to associations found in a 
typical index or glossary) is that they are typed. This is important because it makes it possible 
not only to say that two terms are related, but also how or why they are related. It also makes it 
possible to group together terms that are associated in the same way, thus making navigation much easier. Commonly used association types like “broader term”, “narrower term”, “used for” and “related term” are defined in standards for thesauri such as [Z39.19], [ISO5964]  and 
[ISO2788] .
2.3. Semantic networks
Indexes, glossaries and thesauri are all ways of mapping the knowledge structures that exist 
implicitly in books and other sources of information. In the field of AI (Artificial Intelligence) there also exists the need to be able to represent knowledge (and meaning), in order to support communication between people and machines. One widely used mechanism is that of 
conceptual graphs , whose building blocks are concepts and conceptual relations .
In the following conceptual graph for the phrase “man biting dog” ( [SOWA1984] ), square 
brackets denote concepts ('man', 'bite', 'dog'), and parentheses denote relations ('agent', 'object'):
[man] &#60;- (agent) &#60;- [bite] -> (object) -> [dog]
Under various names, such as “semantic nets”, “associative nets”, “partioned nets” and “knowledge” (or “conceptual”) “maps”, such graphs have been implemented in many AI systems. The earliest forms, called 
existential graphs , were invented by the philosopher Charles Sanders The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
6
Peirce at the end of the 19th century as a graphical notation for symbolic logic. One of the most 
completely worked out schemes, the conceptual graphs developed by John Sowa and his collaborators ( [SOWA2000] ), is claimed to be completely isomorphic with first order logic.
Since the basic model of semantic networks is very similar to that of the topics and associations 
found in indexes, combining the two approaches should provide great benefits in both information management and knowledge management, and this is precisely what the new topic map standard achieves. By adding the topic/occurrence axis to the topic/association model, topic maps provide a means of “bridging the gap” between knowledge representation and the field of information management.
“Knowledge management” is of course one of today's buzzwords and a term that often involves 
not a little marketing hype. For the big consulting companies, knowledge management is essentially about new business management techniques designed to address the fact that people (and the expertise they possess) are the primary assets in an increasingly knowledge-based economy. Others equate knowledge management with information management (especially some vendors of information management tools, who are only too happy to slap a new label on their boxes).
But knowledge is fundamentally different from information: the difference is that between 
knowing a thing versus simply having information about it. And if, as one writer claims ([RUG1997] ), “knowledge management covers three main knowledge activities: generation, 
codification, and transfer”, then topic maps can be regarded as the standard for codification that is the necessary prerequisite for the development of tools that assist in the generation and transfer of knowledge.
3. The TAO of topic maps
The genesis of topic maps is to be found back in the early 1990's when what later became known as the Davenport Group was discussing ways of enabling the interchange of computer documentation. The group went on to develop DocBook ( [DOCBOOK1999] ), one of the most 
widely used DTDs for authoring SGML and XML documents.
One of the problems the Davenport Group faced was that of merging the indexes of different 
sets of documentation, and the insight they arrived at was that:
indexes, if they have any self-consistency at all, conform to models of the structure of the 
knowledge available in the materials that they index. But the models are implicit, and they 
are nowhere to be found! If such models could be captured formally, then they could 
guide and greatly facilitate the process of merging modelled indexes together.2
What eventually became the topic map standard almost ten years later was thus based from the 
start on the basic concepts embodied in indexes, that is Topics, Associations, and Occurrences – the TAO of topic maps. The following sections explain these and the additional concepts of Identity, Facets and Scope – the IFS of topic maps.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
7
3.1. T is for Topic
Topics are clearly the most fundamental concept in all the structures discussed in the first part of 
this paper, and so too in topic maps.
3.1.1. Topics
What then is a topic? A topic, in its most generic sense, can be any “thing” whatsoever – a 
person, an entity, a concept, really anything – regardless of whether it exists or has any other 
specific characteristics, about which anything whatsoever may be asserted by any means whatsoever.
You can't get much more general than that!
In fact, this is almost word for word how the topic map standard defines subject, the term used 
for the real world “thing” that the topic itself stands in for. We might think of a “subject” as corresponding to what Plato called an 
idea. A topic, on the other hand, is like the shadow that 
the idea casts on the wall of Plato's cave: It is an object within a topic map that represents a subject. In the words of the standard: “The invisible heart of every topic link is the subject that its author had in mind when it was created. In some sense, a topic reifies a subject...”
Strictly speaking, the term “topic” refers to the element in the topic map document (the topic 
link) that represents the 
subject being referred to. However, in this article it is used more loosely 
to denote both of these things together. Whenever there is a need to distinguish between the two, we use the terms “topic link” and “subject”.
So, in the context of a 
dictionary of opera , a topic might represent subjects such as “Tosca”, 
“Madame Butterfly”, “Rome”, “Italy”, the composer “Giacomo Puccini”, or his birthplace, “Lucca”: that is, anything that might have an entry in the dictionary – but also much else besides.
Fig. 1. Topics
3.1.2. Topic types
Topics can be categorized according to their kind. In a topic map, any given topic is an instance 
of zero or more topic types . This corresponds to the categorization inherent in the use of 
multiple indexes in a book (index of names, index of works, index of places, etc.), and to the use The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
8
of typographic and other conventions to distinguish different types of topics.
Thus, Puccini would be a topic of type “composer”, Tosca and Madame Butterfly topics of type 
“opera”, Rome and Lucca topics of type “city”, Italy a topic of type “country”, etc. In other words, topic types represent a typical 
class-instance  relationship.
Exactly what one chooses to regard as topics in any particular application will vary according to 
the needs of the application, the nature of the information, and the uses to which the topic map will be put: In a 
thesaurus , topics would represent terms, meanings, and domains; in software 
documentation  they might be functions, variables, objects, and methods; in legal publishing , 
laws, cases, courts, concepts, and commentators; in technical documentation , components, 
suppliers, procedures, error conditions, etc.
Topic types are themselves defined as topics by the standard. You must explicitly declare 
“composer”, “opera”, “city”, etc. as topics in your topic map if you want to use them as types (in which case you will be able to say more about them using the topic map model itself).
Fig. 2. Topic types
Topics have three kinds of characteristics: names, occurrences, and roles in associations.
3.1.3. Topic names
Normally topics have explicit names, since that makes them easier to talk about.3 However, 
topics don't always have names: A simple cross reference, such as “see page 97”, is considered 
to be a link to a topic that has no (explicit) name.
Names exist in all shapes and forms: as formal names, symbolic names, nicknames, pet names, 
everyday names, login names, etc. The topic map standard doesn't pretend to try to enumerate 
and cover them all. Instead, it recognizes the need for some forms of name (that have particularly important and universally understood semantics) to be defined in a standardized way, in order for applications to be able to do something meaningful with them, and at the same time the need for complete freedom and extensibility to be able to define application-specific name types.
The standard therefore provides an element form for topic name , which it allows to occur zero 
or more times for any given topic, and to consist of one or more of the following types of name: The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
9
/G7Abase name  (required)
/G7Adisplay name  (optional)
/G7Asort name  (optional)
Fig. 3. Topic names
The ability to be able to specify more than one topic name can be used to indicate the use of 
different names in different contexts or scopes (about which more later), such as language, 
style, domain, geographical area, historical period, etc. A corollary of this feature is the topic 
naming constraint , which states that no two subjects can have exactly the same name in the 
same scope.
3.2. O is for Occurrence
3.2.1. Occurrences
A topic may be linked to one or more information resources that are deemed to be relevant to 
the topic in some way. Such resources are called occurrences  of the topic.
An occurrence could be a monograph devoted to a particular topic, for example, or an article 
about the topic in an encyclopaedia; it could be a picture or video depicting the topic, a simple mention of the topic in the context of something else, a commentary on the topic (if the topic were a law, say), or any of a host of other forms in which an information resource might have some relevance to the subject in question.
Such occurrences are generally outside the topic map document itself (although some of them 
could be inside it), and they are “pointed at” using whatever mechanisms the system supports, typically HyTime addressing or XPointers. Today, most systems for creating hand-crafted indexes (as opposed to full text indexes) use some form of embedded markup in the document to be indexed. One of the advantages to using topic maps, is that the documents themselves do not have to be touched.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
10
Fig. 4. Occurrences
An important point to note here is the separation into two layers  of the topics and their 
occurrences. This separation is one of the clues to the power of topic maps and we shall return to it later.
3.2.2. Occurrence roles
Occurrences, as we have already seen, may be of any number of different types (we gave the 
examples of “monograph”, “article”, “illustration”, “mention” and “commentary” above). Such 
distinctions are supported in the standard by the concepts of occurrence role  and occurrence 
role type.
Fig. 5. Occurrence roles
The distinction between an occurrence role and its type is subtle but important. In general terms 
they are both “about” the same thing, namely the way in which the occurrence contributes 
information to the subject in question (e.g. through being a portrait, an example or a definition). 
However, the role (indicated by the role attribute) is simply a mnemonic; the type (indicated by 
the type attribute), on the other hand, is a reference to a topic in the map which further 
characterizes the relevance of the role. In general it makes sense to specify the type of the occurrence role, since then the power of topic maps can be used to convey more information about the role.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
11
3.3. A is for Association
Up to now, all the constructs that have been discussed have had to do with topics as the basic 
organizing principle for information. The concepts of “topic”, “topic type”, “name”, “occurrence” and “occurrence role” allow us to organize our information resources according to topic, and to 
create simple indexes, but not much more.4
The really interesting thing, however, is to be able to describe relationships  between topics, and 
for this the topic map standard provides a construct called the topic association .
3.3.1. Associations
A topic association is (formally) a link element that asserts a relationship between two or more 
topics. Examples might be as follows: 
/G7A“Tosca was written by  Puccini”
/G7A“Tosca takes place in  Rome”
/G7A“Puccini was born in Lucca”
/G7A“Lucca is in Italy”
/G7A“Puccini was influenced by  Verdi”
Fig. 6. Topic associations
3.3.2. Association types
Just as topics can be grouped according to type (composer, opera, country, etc.) and 
occurrences according to role (mention, article, commentary, etc.), so too can associations 
between topics be grouped according to their type. The association type  for the relationships 
mentioned above are written_by , takes_place_in , born_in, is_in (or geographical 
containment), and influenced_by . As with most other constructs in the topic map standard, 
association types are themselves defined in terms of topics.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
12
The ability to do typing of topic associations greatly increases the expressive power of the topic 
map, making it possible to group together the set of topics that have the same relationship to any given topic. This is of great importance in providing intuitive and user-friendly interfaces for navigating large pools of information.
It should be noted that topic types are regarded as a special (i.e. syntactically privileged) kind of 
association type; the semantics of a topic having a type (for example, of Tosca being an opera) could equally well be expressed through an association (of type “type-instance”) between the topic “opera” and the topic “Tosca”. The reason for having a special construct for this kind of association is the same as the reason for having special constructs for certain kinds of names (indeed, for having a special construct for names at all): The semantics are so general and universal that it is useful to standardize them in order to maximize interoperability between systems that support topic maps.
Fig. 7. Association types
It is also important to note that while both topic associations and normal cross references are hyperlinks, they are very different creatures: In a cross reference, the anchors (or end points) of the hyperlink occur 
within the information resources  (although the link itself might be outside 
them); with topic associations, we are talking about links (between topics) that are completely 
independent  of whatever information resources may or may not exist or be considered as 
occurrences of those topics.
Why is this important?Because it means that topic maps are information assets in their own right, irrespective of 
whether they are actually connected to any information resources or not. The knowledge that Rome is in Italy, that 
Tosca was written by Puccini and is set in Rome, etc. etc. is useful and 
valuable, whether or not we have information resources that actually pertain to any of these topics.
Also, because of the separation between the information resources and the topic map, the same 
topic map can be overlaid on different pools of information, just as different topic maps can be overlaid on the same pool of information to provide different “views” to different users. Furthermore, this separation provides the potential to be able to interchange topic maps among The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
13
publishers and to merge one or more topic maps.5
Fig. 8. Topic maps as portable semantic networks
3.3.3. Association roles
Each topic that participates in an association plays a role in that association called the 
association role . In the case of the relationship “Puccini was born in Lucca”, expressed by the 
association between Puccini and Lucca, those roles might be “person” and “place”; for “ Tosca 
was composed by Puccini” they might be “opera” and “composer”. It will come as no surprise 
now to learn that the type of an association role (indicated by the type attribute) is also a topic!
Unlike relations in mathematics, associations are inherently multidirectional. In topic maps it 
doesn't make sense to say that A is related to B but that B isn't related to A: If A is related to B, then B 
must, by definition, be related to A. Given this fact, the notion of association roles 
assumes even greater importance. It is not enough to know that Puccini and Verdi participate in an “influenced-by” association; we need to know who was influenced by whom, i.e. who played the role of “influencer” and who played the role of “influencee”.
This is another way of warning against believing that the names assigned to association types 
(such as “was influenced by”) imply any kind of directionality. 
They do not!  This particular 
association type could equally well (under the appropriate circumstances) be characterized by the name “influenced” (as in “Verdi influenced Puccini”). (See section STP-SCOPE
 for an 
example (involving Tosca and Rome) of how the scope feature might be used to make this 
happen in practice.)
3.4. The IFS of topic maps
3.4.1. Identity (and public subjects)
Sometimes the same subject is represented by more than one topic link. This can be the case 
when two topic maps are merged. In such a situation it is necessary to have some way of 
establishing the identity between seemingly disparate topics. For example, if reference works publishers from Norway, France and Germany were to merge their topic maps, there would be a The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
14
need to be able to assert that the topics “Italia”, “l'Italie” and “Italien” all refer to the same subject.
The concept that enables this is that of public subject , and the mechanism used is an attribute 
(the identity attribute) on the topic element. This attribute addresses a resource which identifies 
the subject in question as unambiguously as possible. That resource could be some official, publicly available document (for example, the ISO standard that defines 2- and 3-letter country codes), or it could simply be a definitional description within (or outside) one of the topic maps.
Any two topics that reference the same subject by means of their identity attributes are 
considered to be semantically equivalent to a single topic that has the union of the characteristics (the names, occurrences and associations) of both topics. In the topic map grove, 
a single topic node results from combining the characteristics of the two topics.
6
Public subjects are a necessary precondition for the widespread use of portable topic maps, 
since there is no point in offering a topic map to others if it is not guaranteed to “match up” with relevant occurrences in the receiver's pool of information resources. Activities are therefore underway, under the aegis of ISO, OASIS and the GCA, to develop directories of public subjects.
3.4.2. Facets
Sometimes it is convenient to be able to assign metadata to the information resources that 
constitute the occurrences of a topic 
from within the topic map . To provide this capability, the 
standard includes the concept of the facet.
Facets basically provide a mechanism for assigning property-value pairs to information 
resources. A facet is simply a property; its values are called facet values . Facets are typically 
used for supplying the kind of metadata that might otherwise have been provided by SGML or XML attributes, or by a document management system. This could include properties such as “language”, “security”, “applicability”, “user level”, “online/offline”, etc.
Once such properties have been assigned, they can be used to create query filters producing 
restricted subsets of resources, for example those whose language is “Italian” and user level is “secondary school student”.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
15
Fig. 9. Applying facets for filtering
It is important not to confuse facets with scope (about which more in the next section). Facets 
are generally speaking not used to qualify the objects in the “topic domain” part of the topic map 
(i.e. the topics, topic names and associations). Their purpose is simply to add attributes to information resources. In a sense, facets are orthogonal to the topic map model itself (except to the extent that both facet types and facet value types, like most other things in the topic map standard, are regarded as topics). Despite this, they provide a useful mechanism that complements and significantly extends the power of topic maps.
The distinction between a facet value name and its type, like that between an occurrence role 
and its type, is subtle but important. In one way they are both “about” the same thing, namely the 
value of a property exhibited by an information resource. However, the facet value name 
(indicated by the facetval attribute) is simply a token; the type (indicated by the type attribute), 
on the other hand, is a reference to a topic in the map which further characterizes the relevance of the value. As with occurrence role types, it generally makes sense to specify the type of the facet value, since then the power of topic maps can be used to convey more information about it. One situation in which it often will not make sense to instantiate a topic in order to provide a value for a facet is when the value is an integer, date, or some such about which there is no 
more to be said.
7
3.4.3. Scope
The topic map model allows three things to be said about any particular topic: What names it 
has, what associations it partakes in, and what its occurrences are. These three kinds of 
assertions are known collectively as topic characteristics .
Assignments of topic characteristics are always made within a specific context, which may or 
may not be explicit. For example, if I (yet again) mention “tosca”, I should expect my readers to think of the opera by Puccini (or its principle character), because of the context that has been set by the examples used so far in this paper. For an audience of bakers, however, the name “tosca” has quite other and sweeter connotations: it denotes another topic altogether.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
16
Although we seldom notice it in everyday life, the problem of context is with us all the time. 
According to [SOWA1984]  a sentence is derived from six different kinds of information, four of 
which ( tense and  modality;  presupposition ; focus; and  emotional connotations ) are in way or 
another related to context.
Humans are remarkably good at dealing with context. It is that ability that enables them to make 
sense of two such similar statements as John Smith to marry Mary Jones  on the one hand, and 
Retired priest to marry Bruce Springsteen  on the other, or to parse and interpret the two 
sentences Time flies like an arrow  and Fruit flies like an apple .8
Computers, however, are not yet that smart. Given two such simple statements as Tosca takes 
place in Rome  and Tosca kills Scarpia , most of today's computers would not be able to infer 
which of the topics named “Tosca” was involved. In order to avoid this kind of problem, topic maps consider any assignment of a characteristic to a topic, be it a name, an occurrence or a role, to be valid within certain limits, which may or may not be specified explicitly. The 
limit of 
validity of such an assignment is called its scope.
Scope is defined in terms of themes, and a theme is defined as “a member of the set of topics 
used to specify a scope”. In other words, a theme is a topic that is used to limit the validity of a set of assignments. Thus, the name “tosca” might be assigned to three different topics in scopes defined by the themes “opera”, “opera”+“character”, and “baking” respectively, thereby removing any ambiguity and reducing the chance of errors, for example when merging topic maps.
In fact, the well-designed, consistent and imaginative use of scope in topic maps does much 
more than simply remove ambiguity. It can also aid navigation, for example by dynamically altering the view on a topic map based on the user profile and the way in which the map is used. 
For example, any user that declares a specific interest in opera (or a specific lack of interest in baking!) can have the various toscas ranked accordingly.
Similarly, anything that is known about the general background of the user might be regarded as 
presuppositions that can affect the behaviour of the map. For example, in a topic map devoted to presenting the tourist attractions of a country, scope might be used to qualify topics such that different views on the information were presented to prospective visitors and professional tour operators.
Scope can also be used to dynamically determine which name to use for a topic based on how 
the topic was arrived at. For example, the association between 
Tosca (the opera) and Rome 
might be labelled “takes place in” in the scope of the association role type “action” (the opera) and “setting for” in the scope of the association role type “location” (the city).The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
17
Fig. 10. Scoping topic names, occurrences and associations
As mentioned above, scope should not be confused with facets. The two mechanisms are 
different and complementary. Whereas scope can be seen as a filtering mechanism that is based on 
properties of the topics , facets provide for filtering based on properties of the 
information resources themselves .
3.5. The BUTS of topic maps
Topic maps have no buts, but... well, there are a couple more things to be said and this seemed like as good a title as any.
It is sometimes claimed that “everything in a topic map is a topic”. This is almost true, but not 
quite. Specifically, all types (topic types, association types, occurrence role types, facet types and facet value types) are defined as topics. In addition, scope is defined in terms of themes 
which are themselves topics.
9
This design gives tremendous power to the model, allowing among other things for the topic 
map to be self-documenting. Since the ontology of a topic map (the kinds of things it consists of) is defined in terms of topics in the same map, the map can be used to described its own ontology and provide more functionality and flexibility when used for navigation or querying.
It also turns out that because of the power of the topic map model, topic maps can also be used 
to define the control information used for much topic map processing. The committee that developed topic maps has already coined the term “topic map template” for the declarative part of a topic map, and this is itself a topic map. Current research also indicates that queries on topic maps, schemas for constraining classes of topic maps, and user profiles for interacting with topic maps all can be expressed as topic maps. Finally, interesting work is being done on the use of topic maps for even more esoteric purposes, from the standardized representation of other graph structures, such as social networks, to the management of multiple schema languages.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
18
4. Conclusion
Topic maps started life as a way of representing the knowledge structures inherent in traditional 
back of book indexes, in order to solve the information management problems involved in creating, maintaining and processing indexes for complex documentation. As the model evolved, their scope was broadened to encompass other kinds of navigational aid, such as glossaries, thesauri and cross references.
One of the ground-breaking aspects of topic maps, made possible by the use of the HyTime 
standard, was the use of independent (or out-of-line) linking and addressing mechanisms. This frees the index from the resource it indexes and made it possible to create indexes for resources to which the indexer does not have write access.
However, instead of simply replicating the features of a printed index, the topic map model 
generalizes  them, extending them in many directions at once and thereby enabling navigation in 
hitherto undreamt of ways. With topic maps a user can wander at leisure through a 
multidimensional topic space of knowledge before deciding which information resources are relevant, instead of wading through volumes or megabytes of data in order to find what he or she is looking for. Similarly, queries based on topic maps can be much more accurate than simple full text searching. From being a useful but often underused adjunct to the main body of information, indexes (when based on topic maps) look set to become the 
sine qua non  of 
information delivery and consumption.
The generality and expressive power of the topic map model bring with it other advantages that 
go far beyond those traditionally associated with indexes. The close similarity to semantic nets gives an idea of how topic maps, even without any occurrences connecting them to an information pool, can become valuable resources in their own right. This in turn opens up new business opportunities for creating and selling “portable topic maps” that can be overlaid on multiple information pools. For traditional commercial publishers, producing well-crafted topic maps could be a new way of leveraging their existing knowledge and experience and combating 
the threat to their existence posed by the vast amounts of information now available for free.
The ability to encode arbitrarily complex knowledge structures and link them to information 
assets indicates a major role for topic maps in the realm of knowledge management: Topic maps can be used to represent the interrelation of roles, products, procedures, etc. that constitute corporate memory, and link them to the corresponding documentation.
The list seems to be endless and we can expect new usage scenarios to continue to turn up as 
new tools are developed, new projects conceived and new insights gained. And if a book without an index is like a country without a map, then perhaps one day a world without topic maps will seem like a head without a brain.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
19
Acknowledgements
Thanks to my former colleagues (now collaborators) in the STEP topic map conspiracy, in 
particular Rafal Ksiezyk, Graham Moore and Hans Holger Rath, for many inspiring discussions; to Geir Ove Grønmo for developing all manner of topic map software for me to play with; to the editors of the topic map standard, Steve Newcomb, Martin Bryan and (in particular) Michel Biezunski, and all the others involved in its development, for doing such an excellent job; and to Sylvia Schwab for her advice and encouragement.
For examples, demos and more information about topic maps, see the website 
www.topicmaps.com.
Bibliography
[Bonura 94] Bonura, L. S.: The Art of Indexing  (John Wiley, New York 1994)
[DocBook 99] Walsh, N. and Muellner, L.: DocBook: The Definitive Guide  (O'Reilly, Sebastopol 
1999)
[Goldfarb 90] Goldfarb, Charles F.: The SGML Handbook  (OUP, Oxford 1990)
[ISO 13250] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 13250, Information 
technology – SGML Applications – Topic Maps  (ISO, Geneva 2000)
[ISO 2788] International Organization for Standardization, ISO 2788:1986. Guidelines for the 
establishment and development of monolingual thesauri  (ISO, Geneva 1986)
[ISO 5964] International Organization for Standardization, ISO 5964:1985. Guidelines for the 
establishment and development of multilingual thesauri  (ISO, Geneva 1985)
[Pepper 99] Pepper, S.: “Navigating Haystacks, Discovering Needles”, Markup Languages: 
Theory and Practice , Vol. 1 No. 4 (MIT Press, 1999)
[Pogue 97] Pogue, D. and Speck, S.: Opera for Dummies  (IDG Books, Chicago 1997)
[Ruggles 97] Ruggles, Rudy L., ed. Knowledge management tools  (Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Boston 1997)
[Sowa 84] Sowa, J.: Conceptual Structures  (Addison-Wesley, Reading 1984)
[Sowa 2000] Sowa, J.: Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical and Computational 
Foundations  (Brooks-Cole, Pacific Grove 2000)
[Z39.19] ANSI/NISO, Z39.19. Guidelines for the construction, format and management of 
monolingual thesauri  (ANSI/NISO, Bethesda 1993)The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
20
1Portions of this paper are based on earlier conference proceedings by the same author and the 
article [PEP1999] .
2Personal communication from Steven R. Newcomb, one of the original developers of the topic 
map model.
3It should be clear that the preceding paragraphs would have been rather more difficult to 
understand if we hadn't given names to our topics and topic types!
4The principle exception to this statement is the topic type, as we shall see shortly.
5However, in order to be able to merge topic maps successfully, the additional concepts of 
scope and public subject  are required. These are discussed below.
6Of course, the fact that the identity attributes of two topics are not identical is not sufficient to 
prove that the topics do not refer to the same subject; the only thing that can be proven is that 
there is identity, not that there is not identity.
7Unfortunately, the facetval attribute, as defined in the original version of the standard, has the 
declared value NAME, which prevents the use of numeric and string values. This is regarded as 
a bug which will be fixed in the near future.
8A short explanation for non-English native speakers:
In the first example, the verb “to marry” is used once in its normal sense (to get married to), and 
once is the sense of “to perform the marriage ceremony for”.
The multiple ambiguity is the second example can best be explained using two topic 
associations:
[time]-------(flies like)----[an arrow]
[fruit flies]----(like)------[an apple]
The ambiguity is caused, as can be seen, by the different roles played by the words “flies” (verb, 
noun) and “like” (adverb, verb).
9Some people believe it would be useful if absolutely everything  in a topic map were a topic, 
including associations, association roles, and even the topic map itself, but we won't go into that 
here.The TAO of Topic Maps 2000-04-11
21
