Model Repository
Sparx Systems Enterprise Architect models are held in relational databases. A simple project
with a file-based repository (MS JET or Firebird) can be seamlessly scaled up to a global project
on DBMS servers (such as MySQL) and a Cloud-based repository.
Enterprise Architect
User Guide Series
Author: Sparx Systems
Date:  16/01/2019
Version: 1.0
CREATED WITH

Table of Contents
Model Repository 8
Repository Overview 11
Projects Defined 14
Managing Connections to Projects 16
Project Shortcuts 18
Create Project Shortcut 20
Capture Current Work Environment 22
Encrypt Repository Password 24
File Based Projects 25
Copy a Base Project 28
Sharing File Based Projects 29
Share Enterprise Architect Projects 30
Refresh View of Shared Project 31
Share a Project 32
Distributed Development 33
Replication 34
Design Masters 36
Create Replicas 37
Synchronize Replicas 38
Remove Replication 39
Upgrade Replicas 41
Resolve Conflicts 42
Server Based Repositories 44
Create a Project in a MariaDB Database 46
Create a MariaDB Repository 48
Set up a MariaDB ODBC Driver 49
Connect to a MariaDB Data Repository 51
Create a Project in a MySQL Database 53
Create a MySQL Repository 55
Set up a MySQL ODBC Driver 56
Connect to a MySQL Data Repository 58
Create a Project in an Oracle Database 60
Create an Oracle Data Repository 62
Set up an Oracle ODBC Driver 63
Connect to an Oracle Data Repository (ODBC) 64
Connect to an Oracle Data Repository (OLE DB) 66
Create a Project in a PostgreSQL Database 68
Create a PostgreSQL Repository 71
Set up a PostgreSQL ODBC Driver 72
Connect to a PostgreSQL Data Repository 75
Create a Project in an Access 2007 Database 77
Create a Project in a SQL Server Database 79
Create a SQL Server Repository 81
SQL Server Security Permissions 82
Connect to a SQL Server Data Repository 83
Create a Project in a Sybase ASA/SQL Anywhere Database 85
Create an Adaptive Server Anywhere Repository 87
Set up an ASA ODBC Driver 88
Connect to an ASA Data Repository 89
The WAN Optimizer 91
Cloud Based Repositories 93
Introducing Cloud Services 94
Cloud Server Setup Overview 97
Cloud Server Installation 98
Cloud Server Configuration 101
Cloud Services Configuration Client 104
Cloud Services Logon Screen 107
Extended Server Properties 108
License Screen 110
Add Database Manager 112
Configure Database Manager 119
Port Configuration 122
Add a Port Definition 124
Advanced SSL 128
Add Trust with a Certificate Authority (CA) 129
Self-Signed SSL Certificates 132
Firewall Settings 133
Using Multiple Configurations 134
Cloud Service using IIS (Optional) 135
Connecting Enterprise Architect to a Cloud Service 143
Pro Cloud Server 145
Floating License Server 148
Install and Config 149
User Guide 152
Floating License Configuration Client 153
Floating License Server Connections 155
Set Shared Key Lease Periods 157
Migrate Shared Keys between Stores 158
Add Shared Keys 160
Release Shared Keys 161
Delete Shared Keys 162
Troubleshooting 163
WebEA 166
WebEA Quick Start Guide 167
WebEA Quick Start Guide - IIS 173
WebEA Installation and Configuration 179
How to configure automatic viewable components 183
How to configure WebEA models 185
How to configure WebEA Localization 198
Advanced SSL 199
WebEA User Guide 200
Login 202
WebEA's layout 206
Content Area 211
Main View - Object List 212
Main View - Diagram 214
Main View - Object Properties 216
WebEA - Browser 219
WebEA - Properties View 220
Object Creation in WebEA 222
Add Test Records 226
Add Resource Records 229
Add Change Requests 231
Add a Defect 234
Add an Issue Notification 236
Add a Task 239
Add a Risk 242
Edit Objects 244
Reviews in WebEA 250
Discussions in WebEA 255
Create and check Watch Lists 258
Relationship Matrix 263
Search the model 267
Troubleshooting WebEA 269
Prolaborate 275
Integration Plugins 276
Install and Configure 277
User Guide 284
Add/Edit Data Provider 287
Troubleshooting 292
Visibility Levels 295
Install and Configure 297
User Guide 300
Troubleshooting 302
Additional Functionality Using the Cloud 303
Cloud Server Troubleshooting 305
Reuseable Asset Service (RAS) 309
Connect to the Asset Service 310
Browse Assets 311
Asset Properties 313
Package Contents 314
Package Dependencies 316
Package Technologies 318
Storage Files 320
Compare an Asset to the Model 321
Import an Asset into the Model 322
Set Up Registry Password 325
Set Up the Asset Service 326
Register New Assets 331
Check Package Dependencies 336
Update an Asset 338
Integrate Data from External Providers 340
Navigate External Data 343
External Item Details 345
Linking Items 347
Configuration 350
Change Management 352
Version Control 353
Introduction 354
Version Control Usage 356
Version Control of Model Data 357
Version Control and Reference Data 358
Version Controlling Packages 359
Applying Version Control in a Team Environment 360
Version Control Nested Packages 362
Add Connectors To Locked Elements 363
Project Browser Indicators 364
Offline Version Control 365
Version Control Branching 367
Version Control Product Setup 368
System Requirements 370
Create a Subversion Environment 372
Create a new Repository Sub-tree 374
Create a Local Working Copy 375
Verify the SVN Workspace 376
Subversion Under Wine-Crossover 377
Preparing a Subversion Environment Under Wine 378
TortoiseSVN 380
Create a TFS Environment 381
TFS Workspaces 383
TFS Exclusive Check Outs 385
Verify the TFS Workspace 386
Create a CVS Environment 387
Prepare a CVS Local Workspace 389
Verify the CVS Workspace 390
TortoiseCVS 391
Create an SCC Environment 392
Upgrade at Enterprise Architect Version 4.5, Under SCC Version Control 394
Version Control Set Up 395
Re-use an Existing Configuration 396
Version Control Settings 397
SCC Settings 399
CVS Settings 401
SVN Settings 403
TFS Settings 405
Use Version Control 407
Configure Controlled Package 409
Apply Version Control To Branches 411
Package Version Control Options 412
Check Out a Package 415
Undo Check Out of a Package 416
Check In a Package 417
Check Out a Model Branch 418
Check In a Model Branch 419
Update to the Latest Revision of Selected Package 420
Update to the Latest Revision of All Packages 421
Include Other Users' Packages 422
Export Controlled Model Branch 423
Import Controlled Model Branch 424
Manually Locating Model Branch Files 426
Review Package History 428
Review Package History - SCC Client 429
Retrieve Prior Revision - SCC Client 430
Validate Package Configurations 432
Resynchronize the Status of Version Controlled Packages 433
Tracking Changes 434
Auditing 435
Auditing Quickstart 437
Auditing Settings 438
The Audit View 441
Audit View Controls 443
Audit History Tab 445
Auditing Performance Issues 446
Audit View Performance Issues 447
Package Baselines 448
Baselines 450
Manage Baselines 452
Create Baselines 454
The Compare Utility (Diff) 455
Compare Options 457
Check Visual Changes to Diagrams 458
Example Comparison 462
Baseline Comparison Tab Options 464
Compare Projects 467
Project Maintenance 469
Check Project Data Integrity 470
Reset Table Auto Increment or Identity Columns 472
Upgrade a Project 474
Upgrade Replicas 475
Run SQL Patches 476
Rename a Project 477
Compact a Project 478
Repair a Project 479
Reference Data 480
UML Types 481
Stereotype Settings 482
Shape Editor 484
Tagged Value Types 486
Cardinality 487
People 488
Project Authors 489
Select Users 491
Project Roles 492
Project Resources 494
Project Clients 496
General Types 498
Status Types 499
Constraint Types 501
Constraint Status Types 502
Difficulty Types 504
Priority Types 506
Test Status Types 507
Requirement Types 509
Scenario Types 511
Metrics and Estimation 512
Maintenance 513
Problem Types 514
Testing Types 515
Data Types 516
Resources Window 518
Favorites 521
Sharing Reference Data 523
Link Reference Data to a Shared Repository 524
Export Reference Data 526
Import Reference Data 527
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Model Repository
Enterprise Architect is a rich modeling platform that can be used in a wide range of modeling and design situations, from
a single user accessing a file based repository to a large and distributed team of thousands of modelers working all over
the world using a Cloud Based Repository. The repositories can be scaled up and down, and a project that started with a
single user can be seamlessly scaled up to a large multi-user repository.
Enterprise Architect has been built to support inter-disciplinary modelers collaborating to create a single and unified
view of a system or enterprise, and the platform has numerous built in features to support this team development. By
taking advantage of the base UML modeling language, in addition to the numerous extension languages such as BPMN
and SysML, plus highly effective frameworks such as TOGAF and UAF/UPDM, modelers, designers, managers and
others can build comprehensive, inter-connected models that fully expresses the capabilities, structure and behavior of
fully functioning, multi-layered, complex systems and/or enterprises.
In addition, there are features that allow modelers to discuss the model, such as the Collaborate window, and review
work that has been in progress in the Team Library window. Modelers can even send Model Mail to communicate ideas.
Model Security can be implemented, which facilitates collaboration and prevents work accidentally being overridden.
There are a range of project management features, such as tasks and resource allocation and a Gantt Chart to view
progress on tasks over time, and a Project Calendar that keeps track of important project events.
Integration is so easy and the feature sets so powerful that strategic thinkers, business managers, architects, information
and data modelers, testers, software engineers and many others will derive great benefit from using the tool and
incorporating their models into the overall vision.
Key Concepts
Repository Format Enterprise Architect models are stored in standard relational databases. This
approach has been built into Enterprise Architect from the very first version.
Using a relational database provides a huge advantage over other tools that are
limited in scope and capability by relying on a simple text file based model storage
system. With support for two file based repository formats (MS JET and Firebird)
plus a number of industry standard DBMS servers (such as SQL Server, MySQL
and Oracle) plus Cloud based storage, Enterprise Architect provides fast, scalable,
flexible and transparent access to models in a wide range of deployment scenarios.
Modeling Languages Enterprise Architect is based on industry standard UML, a specification
maintained by the Object Management Group (OMG). Although initially
conceived as a modeling language primarily for software development, over the
years the capabilities and formal (standard) extensions have allowed the UML to
develop into a rich set of constructs and modeling behaviors that provide very rich
and detailed support for everything from software, to business processes,
embedded software, enterprise architecture, organizational charts, strategic model,
mind mapping, requirements management and much more. The success of UML
has been proven over and over again in the real world and the number of new
technologies and modeling profiles that use UML as the underlying
'meta-language' are tribute to the power and effectiveness of UML.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page   8 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Team Development From the very first version of Enterprise Architect the goal has been to provide the
best and most accessible support for Team based development. A wealth of tools
and capabilities have been designed into the platform over the years to support
security, scalability, information sharing, concurrent access, management,
reporting and querying. With the growth of the internet and distributed
development scenarios, Enterprise Architect has evolved to be the pre-eminent
platform for developing models and designs in a globally distributed situation. The
Cloud Server based deployment offers high availability, excellent performance
and simple configuration to rapidly bring diverse and distributed teams into a
single, living repository where work can be easily shared, reviewed, discussed and
managed.
Scalability By leveraging the power of today's DBMS servers and Cloud Based technologies,
Enterprise Architect can be easily scaled up to truly epic proportions. Millions of
objects can be stored and accessed by large and dispersed teams in real time. The
level of scalability is limited solely by the choice of DBMS or Cloud Technology
and the capabilities of the network and server infrastructure the model is deployed
on. In practice, over the many years that Enterprise Architect has been used in
industry, modelers and designers have taken advantage of the powerful in-built
scalability to construct stunning and often huge models that capture an enormous
amount of information about complex and highly inter-connected systems and
enterprises.
Security Due to the nature of the Repository used by Enterprise Architect and the possible
deployment scenarios, security can be managed in a number of ways. In the
Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, there is built-in
support for defining users and groups that permit locking and management of
elements and Packages within the model. This will be discussed later in the section
on Security. In addition, it is also possible to restrict general access to models by
using file-based security access for the MS JET and Firebird-based models (.EAP
and FDB) and DBMS server authentication and access for the larger database
server-based systems. As a further refinement it is also possible to restrict access
to a model using the HTTPS protocol when connecting to a Cloud Based server.
Versioning Enterprise Architect uses industry standard XMI (XML Interchange) format files
to store and version model Packages. By integrating the import and export of XMI
model fragments into a Version Control system (such as SVN) supported by
Enterprise Architect, you can maintain multiple versions of the same model in
different repositories and exercise fine control over the development and design
process. Given the nature of this versioning system, there are several different
scenarios that can be used to maintain different models and how teams access
information. For example, where the versioning system is used as the single point
of truth and de-facto Repository, it could be convenient to use many workgroup or
single user based Repositories that reflect the actual model at a particular point in
time. In contrast, where the versioned files are mainly held for backup and
baseline purposes only, a larger, Team based DBMS server would be used to
provide the model sharing and collaboration capabilities. So whatever the actual
needs are, Enterprise Architect has a number of solution scenarios that can be
adapted to provide the right level of change management and collaborative
development.
Example Repository Tasks
Task
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page   9 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a project in a simple, file-based repository (.EAP and .FEAP files)
Create the project in one of a range of DBMS repositories - these provide for larger models with more concurrently
connected users (Corporate and extended editions)
Manage change within the model
Maintain the integrity of the project data
Share the reference data used across the project, between models and between projects
Allow each user to configure their personal preferences for how project tools display and behave on their
workstation
Document your model through document or web reports, which you can tailor to your purposes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  10 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Repository Overview
An Enterprise Architect repository is stored in a relational database; this can be a file based database such as MS Access
or Firebird, or a database management system (DBMS) such as Oracle or MS SQL Server, on a network or in a Cloud
Based Repository. It is common to start with a File Based Repository and, when the project gets some momentum and
there are a number of modelers accessing the repository, to transfer it to a DBMS. Whichever type of repository is
implemented, the user interface remains the same and users can seamlessly move from one type of repository to another
and continue to contribute as a team member on this powerful modeling platform.
Concepts
Concept Description
Repository as a File In any version of Enterprise Architect you can store a project in a single file with a
.eap or .feap extension.
A .eap file is a Microsoft JET database, so you can also open it using MS ·
Access 97, 2000, 2003 or 2013, or any other reporting tool that can work with
JET databases
A .feap file is a Firebird project file ·
Repository in a DBMS
(Database Management
System)In the Enterprise Architect Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions you can also
use a suitable DBMS repository for projects.
DBMS projects have the same logical structure as .eap and .feap files, but provide
much greater scalability and concurrent access. You connect to a DBMS using
ADO/ODBC (see Connect to a Data Repository). Note that when configuring an
ODBC data source on a 64 bit machine, you should access the ODBC data manager
using the 'Configure > User Tools > ODBC Data Sources' ribbon option, as this will
load the correct ODBC manager to access 32 bit data sources as used by Enterprise
Architect.
Repository in the Cloud In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect you can
further enable the distributed capabilities of Enterprise Architect and use the
Internet or local network to connect to a Cloud-based server on which one or more
Repositories have been installed and configured for access. The Cloud Server is
free software available from Sparx Systems, and is relatively simple to set up and
configure on a suitable Windows-based machine. Firebird files or any DBMS
server are the required Repository types supported by the Cloud Server, and these
can reside on the same machine for best performance, or on another machine to
maximize local and network access. Cloud-based repositories provide the ultimate
in distributed development and minimal client configuration. It is, in fact, much
easier to deploy a Firebird-based repository on a Cloud Server for distributed
development than to set up and manage a full DBMS solution.
Models Enterprise Architect uses this terminology when discussing Repositories and their
contents.
A Model is a related group of content that expresses some focused aspect of a 1.
system or enterprise that is related by the modeling tools and paradigm used.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  11 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
For example, you might build a 'Usecase Model' that describes behavior and
scenarios using UML Use Cases. Process models, architectural models,
behavioral models, structural models, Class models and so on are all Models
within the current Project.
A Project is a group of models that has a single unifying purpose. For example, 2.
a Project to design the navigation systems for a new aircraft or automobile
would be considered a single Project. Within this Project there would be
multiple models. Projects typically define levels of security, necessary types of
views and models, necessary procedures and other management tasks to deliver
the product. Project management capabilities in Enterprise Architect are quite
rich and allow for resource management, security, change management, testing
and other typical project management tasks.
A Repository is a single File, DBMS database or Cloud Server address that 3.
contains one or more Projects. Typically, file based repositories such as MS
JET and Firebird models contain a single Project with multiple models that can
be shared by a small workgroup or only accessed by a single modeler. DBMS
and Cloud based Repositories will often contain more than one Project,
especially where the Projects are in some way inter-related or co-dependent.
Adding Initial Content After creating and accessing your new project in whatever form the Repository
takes, you can now use the Model Wizard to create Model Packages that range from
generic and simple views to more complex and pattern based content.
You can add Models to a project from the Project Browser by:
Right-clicking on an existing model and selecting the 'New Model' or 'Add a ·
New Model using Wizard' options
Right-clicking on a Package and selecting the 'Add | Add a New Model using ·
Wizard' option
Clicking on an existing model, pressing the Insert key and selecting the 'New ·
Model' or 'Add a New Model using Wizard' menu options
Clicking on a Package, pressing the Insert key and selecting the 'Add a New ·
Model using Wizard' menu option
Opening Existing Projects Existing Projects are accessible via the 'Recent Documents' list under the 'File
Management' icon (
 ), the 'Recent' list on the Start Page, and through the
'Open Project' option under the 'File Management' icon.
Connecting to an existing DBMS or Cloud based Repository is discussed in more
detail under the relevant sections on working with those Repository types.
For new users, you can use the 'Start > Help > Help > Open the Example Model'
ribbon option to open and explore the Enterprise Architect Example Repository
supplied with Enterprise Architect. This example is not so much a fully worked
example as a collection of models that show how you can leverage the power of the
Enterprise Architect platform and the UML to create a wide range of visual and text
based models.
DBMS Repositories You can connect to any of these data repositories:
MS Access 97, 2000, 2003 (in all editions - .eap files are stored in Microsoft ·
JET databases)
MS Access 2007 onwards ·
Firebird ·
SQL Server 2000 onwards ·
SQL Server Express 2005 onwards ·
MySQL ·
MariaDB ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  12 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Oracle 9i, 10g, 11g and 12c ·
PostgreSQL ·
Adaptive Server Anywhere ·
In brief, to create a new data repository, you first create a new database with the
DBMS management software, then run supplied scripts to create the logical
structure.
You then use Enterprise Architect data transfer functions to move a project from a
.eap, .feap or DBMS model into the new project. Details are available under the
Server Based Repositories section.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  13 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Projects Defined
An Enterprise Architect Project is a repository for storing, manipulating and managing one or more Models. A single
repository can contain many models, and a Repository can be either file based, hosted in a larger DBMS system or based
in the Cloud.
Concepts
Concept Detail
Project A project can contain a single model, or a number of models, each of which defines
a particular system or process. A model contains the diagrams, elements,
relationships and associated metadata that define the structure and function of the
system or process. These components are organized into a hierarchy of Packages,
which help to group and manage related components.
Model Different aspects of the process or system - or their development - are defined by
Model Packages, which you generate from templates specifically structured to
support the aspects that the Model Packages represent, such as requirements or
deployment. You can generate these templated Packages at any level of the
hierarchy, but as they are created with their own content they are more useful at the
top levels.
View The top-level Packages in a model can also be Views, which represent partitions of
the model that you define yourself.
You can start with standard Views such as Class or Component, or create whatever
partitions are appropriate to your model.
Example Project Structure
Each View or Model Package contains Packages; Use Case Model Package
contains:
Actors and ·
Primary Use Cases ·
It also contains the Use Case diagram, which could be an overview of the Package
structure or function.
Each Package itself can contain one or more diagrams, one or more Packages, and
several elements; the Primary Use Cases Package contains the:
Primary UCDiagram ·
Customer Setup Package ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  14 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Use Case1 element ·
Use Case2 element ·
Each subordinate Package also contains diagrams, elements and (if necessary)
further Packages; the elements are related by connectors created in the diagrams,
and each element and connector has properties, attributes, operations and
extensions defined in the respective 'Properties' dialogs.
Note that models do not have to be constructed this way. Depending on the
methodology you are following and information you need to model, the project
structure might look completely different. In addition, many architectural
frameworks such as TOGAF and ArchiMate specify their own project structure as
part of their overall solution architecture.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  15 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Managing Connections to Projects
An Enterprise Architect project is used for storing and managing the components of one or more UML models. The
Professional edition of Enterprise Architect works on file-based projects (.eap files). If you are using the Corporate
edition (or above), you can also use one of a number of DBMSs such as Oracle or MySQL, or a Cloud Based server to
host the project repository.
When you select to open a project, you can:
Select a shortcut to a recent project, to open it ·
Browse for another existing project to open ·
Remove a shortcut from the list of recently-opened projects ·
Specify connection details for opening a project hosted on a DBMS ·
Connect to a project via the Cloud ·
Create a new Enterprise Architect project file ·
Access
Ribbon
 > Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Other Start Page | New | Manage projects
Options
Field/Button Action
Local File Click on this button to open a file browser dialog, and locate and select an existing
.EAP, .EAPX or .FEAP file; the .EAP file can be a project file or a shortcut to a
project hosted on a DBMS. Alternatively, click on the drop-down arrow and select
the 'New Project' option to create a new project.
Connect to Server Click on this button to specify connection details for opening an Enterprise
Architect project that is hosted on a DBMS. The 'Windows Data Link Properties'
dialog displays; start to define the connection to the project's server-based
repository.
You can also click on the drop-down arrow and select:
'Connection Wizard' - the 'Data Link Properties' dialog again displays ·
'Connection String' - the 'Connection String' dialog displays; type in or paste ·
the connection string and click on the OK button to connect directly to the
project
Connect to Cloud Click on this button to connect to a project through the Cloud. The 'Cloud
Connection' dialog displays, on which you specify the server, URL and model name
to access via the Cloud.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  16 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Recent Projects This panel lists the most recently opened projects, up to a maximum of ten. To open
one of these projects either double-click on the name, or click on it and then click
on the Open button.
Each project name is shown with its access path. You can edit the access path by
right-clicking on it and selecting the 'Edit Connection String' context menu option;
make the changes on the 'Connection String' dialog, and click on the OK button.
Similarly, if the project has a connection string (not a shortcut), you can change the
name of the project by right-clicking on it and selecting the 'Edit Project Name'
menu option; type a new name in the 'Edit Project Name' dialog and click on the
OK button.
The list of recent projects is also displayed:
On the Start Page, under the 'Recent' heading ·
As a drop-down menu under the Open Project button on the Default Tools ·
toolbar
With the 
  list of options ·
Remove Selection from
ListClick on a project name and click on this button to remove that project name from
the 'Recent' list.
Show this Dialog at Startup Select the checkbox to show this 'Open Enterprise Architect Project' dialog
automatically upon starting Enterprise Architect. Deselect the checkbox to hide the
dialog.
Default Project to Open Click on a project name in the 'Recent' list and select this checkbox to open the
selected project automatically whenever you start up Enterprise Architect.
Open Click on this button to open the currently selected project in the 'Recent Projects'
list.
Cancel Click on this button to close this dialog without any further action.
Help Click on this button to display this Help topic.
Notes
Use of a DBMS and/or Cloud for hosting the model repository is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate ·
editions of Enterprise Architect
Enterprise Architect supports these DBMS products for hosting model repositories: ·
    - SQL Server and SQL Server Express;
    - MySQL
    - Oracle 9i, 10g, 11g or 12c
    - Postgre SQL and
    - ASA
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  17 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Shortcuts
Enterprise Architect enables you to create a desktop shortcut (or proxy file) to an Enterprise Architect project (Cloud,
DBMS or file-based). Each shortcut is a file containing the connection string for the model. In addition, the shortcut also
defines views that Enterprise Architect should open when it opens the model, as outlined here. In this manner it is a
convenient and customizable way of quickly sharing a connection to a Cloud based model without requiring other users
to know the details of the connections string, model name and other parameters.
Access
Ribbon
 > Save As Shortcut
Topics
View Detail
Diagrams Define one or more specific diagram(s) to be loaded on opening the project.
Model Search Open the Model Search with a specific text string and search type.
For searches operating on the current tree selection, a diagram in the target Package
must be opened first.
If you use a custom SQL search, the SQL must include ea_guid AS CLASSGUID
and the object type.
You specify a single Model Search to open.
The Relationship Matrix
with a saved profileOpen the Relationship Matrix with a saved profile.
You specify a single Relationship Matrix profile to open.
The default Team Library Open the default Team Library document.
You specify the Team Library once.
Working Set Open a working set.
You specify a single Working Set to open.
This is very similar to the shortcut itself, opening a defined set of diagrams and
views. However, the working set can also open source code editors, therefore
widening the capabilities of the shortcut alone.
Working sets make it easy to customize the main views you want to open without
having to resave your project short cuts. The working set is easy to tailor to your
changing requirements, adding greater flexibility to any short cut that calls the
working set.
Also, working sets provide the capability of storing the currently-engaged files
when closing a model, and reopening them in the context in which you were last
using them. The basic project shortcut can also do this, but once the work
environment is captured the shortcut returns to the same set up each time you use it.
The working set always captures the current work environment each time the model
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  18 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
closes.
This option can be very useful in, for example, a coding environment when you
want to return to the last files you were editing.
Workspace Layout Apply a selected Workspace Layout, which opens and sets out the appropriate
screens and windows for a specific area of work, such as model simulation.
You specify a single Workspace Layout to open. However, by creating and using
separate shortcuts you can open Enterprise Architect in exactly the configuration
you need for the work you want to do - modeling, coding, or debugging, for
example.
An example shortcut You might create a shortcut to open, in sequence:
A Development module ·
The Model Search for a simple search on the term Issue ·
The module Issues diagram ·
The module 'Changes' diagram ·
Enterprise Architect opens the appropriate windows in the sequence in which you
list the options, displaying the last view in the list as the active view.
In this example, the project opens with the Enterprise Architect work area showing
the two diagram tabs and the 'Model Search' tab, and with the 'Changes' diagram
displayed in the Diagram View.
Notes
If specified, the shortcut views override any default diagram defined for the model or current user ·
A shortcut does not affect the original Enterprise Architect .exe file or icon, or any other shortcut you might have ·
defined; you can use all of these independently
If you are using a database repository other than MS Access 97, 2000, 2003 or 2013, you can configure the shortcut ·
to encrypt the password used to set up the connection between Enterprise Architect and the repository; the
Enterprise Architect user does not have the real password, thereby preventing them from accessing the repository
using other tools such as Query Analyzer or SQLPlus
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  19 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create Project Shortcut
You can create a shortcut to an Enterprise Architect project (either a DBMS project or file based project). The shortcut
can specify additional windows and diagrams to open up automatically every time the shortcut is run, to create a working
environment in advance for other users.
Shortcuts are stored with a .EAP extension, but are actually small text files that tell Enterprise Architect what project to
open and what initial views and windows to display.
Access
Ribbon
: Save as Shortcut
Create a project shortcut
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
2 Open the required project.
3Select the '
  |Save as Shortcut' option.
The 'Save Project Shortcut' dialog displays.
4Click on the 
  button at the end of the 'Target File' field.
The 'Save Project As' dialog displays.
5 Browse for the appropriate file location and, in the 'File name' field, type an appropriate filename.
All shortcuts are .EAP files, regardless of whether the model itself is a .EAP file or a DBMS model.
6 Click on the Save button to return to the 'Save Project Shortcut' dialog.
7 Click on the Add Other button and select the required option to define:
A diagram to open ·
A Relationship Matrix profile to open ·
The Team Library ·
A Model Search to perform ·
A working set to apply ·
A workspace layout to apply ·
8 The appropriate browser or dialog displays to define the view to display; enter the details and click on the
OK button.
The view is added to the 'Actions when model is opened' field; the entry is automatically selected, with a
tick in the checkbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  20 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
9 Repeat steps 7 and 8 for as many additional views as you require.
10 Review the items in the 'Actions when model is opened' field.
If you decide not to have an item in the shortcut, deselect its checkbox ·
If you want to clear all selected items, click on the Include None button ·
Unselected entries are deleted when you save the shortcut.
11 If you decide to change the sequence and/or make a different view display first in the Diagram View:
Click on the appropriate entry ·
Click on the 'Up Hand' or 'Down Hand' buttons ·
12 Click on the OK button to save the shortcut.
Notes
When you subsequently open the 'Save Project Shortcut' dialog, it lists the currently-opened views in the order in ·
which they were opened; you can add further views or remove them from the shortcut
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  21 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Capture Current Work Environment
You can capture the current Enterprise Architect work environment in your shortcut. This maintains the work
environment from that point, and is useful if you intend to close and re-open the model and return to the same
configuration many times.
If you simply want to return to whatever work environment you happen to be in each time you close the model, you
should use a work set that captures the current environment, either by itself or as part of a broader project shortcut.
Access
Ribbon
: Save as Shortcut
Capture your current work environment
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
2 Open the required project and work in it.
3 At the point at which you decide to capture your work environment in a shortcut, ensure that:
You have opened all diagrams you require ·
If necessary, you have opened the Team Library, Model Search (with appropriate search term and ·
type) and/or Relationship Matrix (at the appropriate profile)
The view you want to resume work on is the last one opened ·
4 Select the 'Save As Shortcut' menu option.
The 'Save Project Shortcut' dialog displays, showing a list of actions derived from the views you currently
have open.
5 If you accessed Enterprise Architect via a shortcut, the 'Target File' field displays the file location of that
shortcut.
Otherwise, click on the 
  button at the end of the 'Target File' field.
The 'Save Project As' dialog displays.
6 Browse for the appropriate file location and, in the 'File name' field, type an appropriate filename.
All shortcuts are .EAP files, regardless of whether the model itself is a .EAP file, .FEAP file or DBMS
model.
7 Click on the Save button to return to the 'Save Project Shortcut' dialog.
8 In the 'Actions when model is opened' field, click on the Include All button.
9 If you also want to save current window positions click 'Add Other' followed by 'Add Workspace Layout'.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  22 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The dialog shown allows you to select an existing layout or save the current layout.
10 Click on the OK button to save the shortcut.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  23 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Encrypt Repository Password
If your model is developed on a DBMS repository, the 'Save Project Shortcut' dialog has an 'Encrypt Connection String'
checkbox.
You can create the shortcut actions and, if necessary, select the checkbox to encrypt the database connection string.
You distribute the shortcut file to the database users who are to access the model. The users then have an encrypted
string that prevents them from directly accessing the database using other tools.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  24 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
File Based Projects
Enterprise Architect provides a convenient light-weight, low-barrier and portable file-based repository out-of-the-box,
which is ideal for modelers who want to start work immediately; with the file-based repository you can be modeling
within a few minutes. When a number of colleagues want to contribute to the models, the file can be moved to a
file-share and it is possible to work with this setup even when the model becomes quite large and the number of users
increases to ten or more. All editions of Enterprise Architect support this type of repository in the form of a .eap file in an
Access database, or a .feap file in a Firebird repository.
You can create your own repository from scratch, but a default repository (EABase.eap) is conveniently supplied, located
in the Enterprise Architect installation directory. The file acts as a template for creating new projects and can be copied
to give you a head start in creating a repository. You can tailor this repository to suit your organization or create your
own base repository. A File Based Repository can be easily transferred to a DBMS based repository using the Project
Transfer feature, allowing a project to be scaled up when the team increases in size or when organizational policy
dictates it.
File-based project tasks
Task Detail
Create .EAP Project Files Select one of:
 > New Project menu option ·
'Local File | New Project' option on the 'Manage Projects' dialog, or ·
'Create a new project' option on the Start Page ·
All of these options display the 'New Project' dialog; select a directory and enter a
file name for your project (.eap under JET 3 or .eapx under JET 4).
Once the project has been saved, the Model Wizard displays, which makes a
selection of Model Patterns available; select the Model Patterns to use.
Enterprise Architect adds a model containing the selected Model Packages to the
Project Browser.
Create .FEAP Project Files As for a .eap/.eapx file, except that in the 'New Project' dialog, in the 'Save as Type'
field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the .feap file extension.
Enterprise Architect will check your input and display an error message if:
Your Firebird repository is not located on the local drive; a Firebird repository ·
is not appropriate for a network shared project
The file path contains characters that are not in the system codepage ·
Location of default
(EABase.eap) repository
templateThe default installation directories, depending on which version you have installed,
are:
Registered version: C:\Program Files\Sparx Systems\EA ·
Trial version: C:\Program Files\Sparx Systems\EA Trial ·
Lite version: C:\Program Files\Sparx Systems\EA Lite ·
A base project contains templates and reference data from which you can quickly
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  25 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
develop your own project.
Note that in addition to deriving a new model from EABase.eap. it is also possible
to start a new project by copying an existing one. While it is possible to simply
'copy' the .EAP file at the file system level, this results in two identical models and
should only be used when that is the required behavior; for example, when
distributing a model to a client for verification. If you use the built in functions of
Enterprise Architect to create a new model based on an existing one, Enterprise
Architect will modify the unique identifiers (GUIDS) for all elements and related
constructs so that the new model is essentially unique, and not a simple copy of the
existing one.
Configure Project Having created your project, you can set a range of project parameters to define
defaults, tailor the project to particular coding languages, and ensure consistent
development and use of the project.
Create Custom Templates You can customize any Enterprise Architect project as a template project with
company standards, tutorials, frameworks and any other common piece of modeling
already in-built; with careful planning you can save yourself many hours of work at
project start-up.
Best Practices for File Based Repositories
Single User Simple file based repositories (.eap and .feap files) are best suited to single user
development with the model file placed on the modelers local drive. This is fast,
very efficient and provides a powerful means of getting started in modeling a
particular solution. Many models will start out as single user repositories and only
later be migrated into a DBMS or Cloud based scenario for larger team access. If
you need to quickly start work on a project and do some exploratory work, or you
are working alone as a consultant, the .eap or .feap file format is ideal.
Small Workgroup With all versions of Enterprise Architect it is possible to share a .eap file at the
network file level. This is really only a suitable solution for small workgroups (up
to, say, five members) who are collaborating on a shared model. This solution is
very much at the mercy of the quality of the network connection and could be less
than ideal if collaborating users increase in number and/or the model grows very
large. As Enterprise Architect on the user's machine is still running all the queries
and performing all database operations on a network file, a slow network will result
in less than ideal performance. As team size and model size increases it is best to
upsize to either a DBMS or Cloud-based architecture.
In Conjunction with
Version ControlOne additional scenario in which file based repositories can be used to great effect
is with a Version Control system such as SVN. If the SVN system holds the master
content, then individual developers/modelers can check out the material of interest
to them into a local .eap or .feap file. When they have made their changes they can
migrate their work back into the shared master. This style of development is quite
effective, and as the import and export of model material from the Version Control
system works best with single user local project files, it is a good match and a good
use of the two technologies.
Copy of Repository for
Storage or ReviewA further use of the single file repository is for distribution to clients and others for
review and comment, where the original model(s) is located in a DBMS or Cloud
that the recipient would not have access to. As it is relatively easy to bulk copy a
DBMS model to a local .eap file, this is a good method for passing on a model to a
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  26 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
client or another interested party. If some of the material is restricted, it is possible
to delete sections from this single file repository after the bulk copy is complete and
before passing it on.
Replication If network access is limited and DBMS and Cloud based solutions are not possible,
another (less than optimal but still effective) team based solution is to use the built
in replication features of the .EAP file format. By creating a design master and
distributing replicas to other modelers, it is possible to effectively share and
contribute to a model without having direct shared access to the common model.
On the down side, someone will have to perform the model merges as required and
if there are replication conflicts (two changes to the same item) this will require
manual resolution.
Notes
You can also add Model Packages to a project by clicking on the Project Browser header bar and selecting the 'New ·
Model From Pattern' menu option
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  27 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Copy a Base Project
When you create a new project, you can use the Model Wizard to define the structure and contents. Alternatively, you
can copy an existing template or base project which is already largely set up, containing company standards, tutorials,
frameworks and any other common modeling structures. You can also copy an operational .EAP or .FEAP project file to
a new file location under a new name to, for example:
Provide separate copies for individual team members ·
Create an evaluation or distribution version of the project ·
If you intend to use an existing project file as the template for a new project, it is important to use this method rather than
simply copying the .EAP file using Windows Explorer. This process provides the option to reset all the unique identifiers
for Packages and elements, so that your new project is truly unique - otherwise you create an exact copy of the original
project.
Access
Open the template project or existing operational project then;
Ribbon
: Save Project As
Create a new project from a base project
Option Action
Target Project Type the new project filename.
You can either type in the file path as well, or click on the Browse button and
browse for the required file path.
If this is to be a shared project, store the file on a shared network resource such as a
Network Server or Workgroup Server.
Source Project Defaults to the path and name of the currently-open template or project.
Reset New Project GUIDs If the target project is to be a different project from the source (such as when you
copy a base template), select this checkbox to replace all GUIDs from the base
model with fresh GUIDs in the new model.
However, if the new project is to be a direct copy of the source, or based on a
project that is under Version Control, we recommend that you deselect this
checkbox to prevent duplication of Packages when the 'Get Latest' facility is used.
Save As Click on this button to save and open the new project.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  28 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Sharing File Based Projects
Enterprise Architect offers a diverse range of functionality designed specifically for sharing projects in team-based and
distributed development environments, through network deployment of model repositories, DBMS based repositories,
Cloud based models, replication and XMI Import/Export.
Features
Feature Detail
Network Deployment Network deployment is possible under three different schemas:
File based repositories ·
DBMS server based repositories, or ·
Cloud based deployment (recommended) ·
DBMS server based repositories offer better:
Response times than files on networks, due to the inherent structure of the ·
DBMS
Solutions when networking problems are encountered, as they have the ability ·
to backtrack transactions caused by external breakdowns
Replication Replication enables data interchange between .EAP based repositories and is
suitable for where many different users work independently in parallel
development.
Modelers merge their changes into a Design Master only as required; it is
recommended that a backup is carried out prior to replication.
Replication cannot be performed on repositories stored on a DBMS server.
XMI Import and Export XMI Import/Export can be used to export and share discrete Packages between
developers; XMI enables the export of Packages into XML files that can then be
imported into any model.
Package control can be used to set up Packages for Version Control and to enable
batch export of Packages using XMI; Version Control enables a repository to be
maintained by a third-party source code control application that is used to control
access and record revisions.
Notes
DBMS Repository support is available with the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  29 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Share Enterprise Architect Projects
The most efficient way of using Enterprise Architect to manage a team development is to share a project amongst a team
of designers, developers and analysts.
Facilities
Facility Detail
By Sharing a project Many people can work on the model at the same time and contribute their ·
particular skill
Team members can always see what the latest changes are, keeping the team ·
informed and up to date with the project status
You can share a project in
three waysPlace the project in a shared network directory ·
Use replication ·
Use a shared DBMS-based repository ·
Notes
Project Sharing and Replication are available in the Professional, Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of ·
Enterprise Architect
DBMS repositories are supported in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  30 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Refresh View of Shared Project
When a user of a shared model checks out a Package and makes changes, other users can see those changes by refreshing
their view of the Package or the changed diagram within the Package, in a number of ways.
Refresh the view
Object Options
Project Right-click on the Package name in the Project Browser and select the ·
'Contents | Reload Current Package' option, or
Press F5 to refresh the Package, or ·
Select the 
  (Reload Project) icon in the Project Tools toolbar, or ·
Press Ctrl+Shift+F11, or ·
Close the project and reopen it ·
Diagram Select the 'Start > View > Workspace > Manage Views > Reload View' ribbon ·
option, or
Right-click on the opened diagram tab in the Diagram View, and select the ·
'Reload <diagram name>' option
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  31 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Share a Project
The easiest way to share a project amongst a work group of developers and analysts is to place the project file on a
shared network drive, to which people connect from their workstations.
Individual developers and analysts can then open and work on the project concurrently.
Network Issues
Enterprise Architect accepts a number of concurrent connections without issue; however, there are points you should
consider:
Issue Description
Lock Outs There can be occasional 'lock-outs' when one user tries to access or update
something another user is in the process of modifying.
Other Changes Changes to the Project Browser (and other project views) are not automatically
updated; to compensate for this, users must occasionally reload their project to see
changes made by other users.
Diagrams If two or more people work on the same diagram concurrently, unexpected results
can occur; it is best to allow only one analyst to work on a diagram at a time.
System crashes (.EAPX/.EAP files only) If a user's machine crashes, the network suffers an outage
or a machine is turned off unexpectedly, the project file might require repair to
compensate for the sudden inconsistency; a repair facility is provided ('Configure >
Model > Integrity Check> Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Repair .EAPX/.EAP File')
to carry out this task.
Notes
Firebird-based projects (.feap files) are not suitable for sharing over a network ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  32 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Distributed Development
Enterprise Architect supports distributed development using two different techniques.
Replication
Using replication, geographically separated analysts can update and modify parts of the model in replicas, then merge
these back together at a central location.
XMI Import/Export
Using XMI-based import/export, you can export discrete Packages to XML to share among the development team; this
has several benefits over replication:
You can assemble a model from only the parts necessary to get your job done ·
You can assemble a full model if required ·
You can assemble a model from different Package versions for different purposes (such as customer visible, internal ·
release only)
You can roll-back parts of a model as required ·
There is less chance of 'collisions' between developers if each works on a discrete Package ·
The process is controllable using a Version Control system, or through Package control ·
XMI based import/export is UML1.3 / XMI1.1 compliant; you can also write XML based tools to manipulate and extract
information from XML files to enhance the development process.
XMI-based Import/Export is accessed through the 'Publish > Model Exchange > Export XMI' and 'Import XMI' ribbon
options.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  33 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Replication
Apart from sharing Enterprise Architect projects in real time over a network, you can also share projects using
replication.
Guide
Facility Detail
Replication Replication is a powerful means of sharing projects between isolated or mobile
users; it enables different users to work independently of one another, and to merge
their changes at a later time.
In Replication:
A project is converted to a design master, then replicas are made of the master ·
Users take the replicas away, modify the project, then bring their replicas back ·
to be synchronized with the master file
Use Replication To use replication:
Convert the base project to a design master. 1.
Create replicas from the design master. 2.
Take the replica away and work on it as required, then bring it back for 3.
synchronization with the design master.
Synchronize the replicas, during which all changes to both the master and the 4.
replica are propagated in both directions, so they both finally contain the same
information.
Enterprise Architect Merge
RulesEnterprise Architect follows these rules in merging:
Additions are cumulative; that is, two replicas each creating three new Classes ·
result in six new Classes after merging
Deletions prevail over modifications; if one replica changes a Class name and ·
other deletes the Class, merging replicas results in both files losing the Class
Conflicting modifications appear in the 'Resolve Replication Conflicts' dialog.
Upgrades and Replicas When you upgrade your version of Enterprise Architect, you must not open a
replica until you have opened the design master and then synchronized the replicas
with the master; you cannot directly upgrade a replica.
Avoid Change Collisions If two or more people make changes to the same element, Enterprise Architect
arbitrarily overwrites one person's change with the other's; to avoid this, different
users should work on different Packages.
However, since Enterprise Architect does not enforce this rule, it is possible for
users' work to conflict; to minimize difficulties, please note these guidelines:
If users are likely to have worked in the same area of the model, they should ·
both witness the synchronization and confirm that they are happy with the net
result
If small pieces of information have been lost, they should be typed into one of ·
the merged models after synchronization
If a large piece of information has been lost (for example, an overwritten large ·
Class note) use the 'Resolve Replication Conflicts' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  34 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Disable or Remove
Replication FeaturesIf you have converted a project to a design master but now want to disable the
replication features, you can remove Replication; ensure that you back up all your
files first.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  35 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Design Masters
A design master is the first converted Enterprise Architect project that supports replication. You create the master project
from which you create replicas that can be modified independently of the master project and re-merged later.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Make Design
Master
Create a design master
Step Action
1 Take a back-up of the required Enterprise Architect project.
2 Select the project in the Project Browser.
3 Select the 'Make Design Master' menu option and follow the on-screen instructions.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  36 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create Replicas
A replica is one of several copies of the design master of an Enterprise Architect project. You create the copy of the
master project for you or another user to modify independently and re-merge later.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Create New
Replica
Create a replica
Step Action
1 First create a design master, then select the 'Create New Replica' menu option and follow the on-screen
instructions.
2 Edit the replica over time and, when required, return the file for merging with the design master.
Notes
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
'Manage Replicas' permission to create a replica
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  37 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Synchronize Replicas
Synchronizing replicas combines the changes made to each file. You can:
Merge the changes made to each replica with the design master, so that a new set of replicas with all changes can be ·
generated and distributed
Combine the changes made to two replicas, should it be necessary for two team members to combine their work ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Synchronize
Replicas
Synchronize replicas
Step Action
1 Open the design master project file (or the first required replica).
2 Select the 'Synchronize Replicas' menu option.
3 Locate and select the (second) required replica to merge the open project and the replica.
Notes
Information is copied both ways, including deletes, updates and inserts; both projects end up containing identical ·
information
If this process generates 'conflicting changes' errors, you should review and, if necessary, resolve these conflicts ·
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
'Manage Replicas' permission to create a replica
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  38 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Remove Replication
Replication makes many changes to the database structure of your model, so the model file becomes considerably larger
with additional information; you might, therefore, decide not to use the replication feature any more.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Remove
Replication
Remove replication from your model
Step Action
1 Open a .EAP file (any .EAP file, other than the one having replication removed) - the menu option is not
available if no file is open.
2 Select the 'Remove Replication' menu option.
The 'Remove Replication Wizard' dialog displays.
3 Enter the full path and file name of the project to have replication removed.
Click on the Next button.
If the project displays Version Number 7.0 this indicates that Auditing is enabled. Auditing should be
disabled before proceeding (see Notes).
4 Enter the full path and file name of the base Enterprise Architect model (with no replication) to act as
template.
Click on the Next button.
5 Enter the full path and required file name for the output file.
Click on the Next button.
6 Select whether to have a log file created and, if so, enter a file name for the log file.
7 Click on the Run button to begin removing replication.
Enterprise Architect creates a new project containing all the model information.
Your model has now had replication removed, and should be considerably smaller.
Notes
You cannot remove replication from a model with Auditing enabled - if you want to remove replication: ·
Disable Auditing. 1.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  39 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If prompted to do so, allow Enterprise Architect to roll back the database version. 2.
Remove replication. 3.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  40 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Upgrade Replicas
A new release of Enterprise Architect might contain changes to the underlying project structure, such as more tables or
changed queries. If you use Replication, you must take care with your upgrade.
Considerations
Consideration Detail
Open Design Master
Project firstAfter installing the new version of Enterprise Architect, it is very important that
you open the design master before opening any of the replicas with the updated
version.
Changes to the database
designChanges to the database design in a replicated project can ONLY be done to the
design master; trying to update a replica at best does nothing, and at worst causes
the update of the master to fail.
Propagate Changes Design changes are propagated through to the replicas the next time the replicas are
synchronized with the master.
Alternatively One other strategy is to remove replication from a copy of the replica set, upgrade
that project and convert it into a new design master from which new replicas are
created.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  41 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Resolve Conflicts
If two or more people each work on the same model object in their respective replicas between synchronizations, the
replication engine has problems in resolving which change is the master. You need to select which of two conflicting
changes you should save to the Design Master and/or replicas, where a substantial piece of information has been
overridden by a user and you want to retrieve it.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Resolve
Replication Conflicts
Considerations
Consideration Detail
Avoid the problem Ensure that each team member always works in a separate area of the model within
their replica.
Check for conflicts After synchronizing replicas, open the 'Resolve Conflicts' dialog (see next table)
and check if there were any conflicts.
Response to conflicts When a project record has been modified in different ways by different users, the
replication engine selects one of the conflicting values based on rules within the
JET replication manager.
However, the replication engine stores the discarded changes and flags the conflict
on the 'Resolve Conflicts' dialog so that you can choose to roll in the discarded
change instead.
Normally it is not necessary or desirable to examine conflicts, since they represent
relatively inconsequential pieces of information that can very easily be modified
through the normal Enterprise Architect interface; for example, by moving a
diagram element.
The only case in which the 'Resolve Conflicts' dialog should be used is where a
substantial piece of information has been overridden by a user, and you want to
retrieve it.
Resolve conflicts in changes to the same model object in two separate replicas
Step Action
1 Synchronize a replica with the Design Master, and display the 'Resolve Conflicts' dialog.
2 In the 'Table with Conflicts' list, click on the entry that is likely to contain the lost information.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  42 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
3 Click on each entry in the Conflicting Records list.
When the lost information appears in the Conflict Details list, click on the Overwrite with Conflict button.
4 In the 'Conflicting Records' list, you can also copy each Row ID to the clipboard by right-clicking on the
row and selecting the 'Copy to Clipboard' menu option.
You can locate the object that is in conflict in the Project Browser or diagrams, by right-clicking on it and
selecting the 'Find in Project Browser' or 'Find in Diagrams' option.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  43 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Server Based Repositories
As a repository becomes larger, or the number of concurrent users increases or organizational policy dictates, it might be
more appropriate to use a database management system (DBMS) to store the repository. A File Based Repository can be
created and used in any edition of Enterprise Architect; however, if you decide to use a DBMS based repository you will
need to use the Corporate, Unified or Ultimate editions. Enterprise Architect has a function to transfer your repository
from a file based repository to a server based one, helping you to get started quickly and with no changes in the
user-interface.
Note that the performance of the Repository as experienced by end users will depend very much on the quality and
power of the server machine and the network infrastructure on which the DBMS and user are located. Using a DBMS
over a very high latency (10ms or higher) network can result in significant delays and visibly inferior performance.
When network latency is an issue, Sparx Systems recommends using a Cloud Based Server as the interactions are
optimized to reduce the effect of network latency.
Also it is important to note that all models are quite different and although Sparx Systems does its best to maximize
performance based on what is expected to be held in a repository, sometimes this is not quite sufficient. In these rare
cases a review of the database indexes would be good practice to maximize data retrieval and access. This will ensure
that end users receive the best possible performance even when models contain millions of constructs.
Set up a Project on a DBMS repository
To set up your project on a DBMS repository, you work through these stages:
Set up your DBMS software and create a repository. 1.
Create the required tables in your repository, by running a script supplied on the Sparx Systems website. 2.
(For certain DBMS products) Set up an ODBC driver to enable connection to the repository. 3.
Transfer the project from the source file to the DBMS repository; the source file can be: 4.
    - a .EAP or .FEAP base model, to begin a new project from scratch, or
    - a previously-developed project file, to move an existing project into the DBMS repository
Connect to your repository. 5.
DBMS Products you can use
You can set up your project on a repository in:
Firebird from v2 ·
MySQL from v5 ·
MariaDB ·
Microsoft SQL Server from 2005, all editions including Express and Azure ·
Microsoft Access from 2007 ·
Oracle from 9i (all editions) ·
PostgreSQL from v8 ·
Sybase Adaptive Server Anywhere 8 or 9, or SQL Anywhere 10, 11 or 12 ·
For information on creating a project on a specific DBMS from this list, see Learn more.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  44 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
You cannot move a model from a source .eap file of an Enterprise Architect version earlier than 3.5.0 without ·
updating it first
Before proceeding, you must have MDAC 2.6 or higher installed on your system ·
(Optional, but recommended) before actually transferring the project structure from the file to the repository, ·
perform a Project Data Integrity Check on the file
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  45 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in a MariaDB Database
To create a project in a repository on MariaDB, you work through these stages:
Stage 1: Create an empty database repository and set up the data tables ·
Stage 2: Set up the ODBC Driver ·
Stage 3: Perform a project integrity check on the project file you are using as a base (optional, but recommended) ·
Stage 4: Transfer the data ·
Stage 5: Connect to the repository and open the project ·
Prerequisites
A machine with MariaDB version 10.1.2 or higher installed and running, ·
MySQL ODBC ·
Create a MariaDB Repository
Create the repository as outlined here.
Step Action
1 Create a new empty database and configure it to your installation's defaults.
2 Load the EASchema_1220_MySQL.sql file from the Sparx Systems website into your SQL management
console of choice (such as HeidiSQL).
3 Run the script to create the required database schema.
Set Up the ODBC DSN
Step Action
1 Create a suitable ODBC Data Source (using the MySQL ODBC driver and NOT the MariaDB driver), to
point to your new database.
Select the extended option:
'Return matched rows instead of affected rows' ·
Perform a Project Integrity Check
Step Action
1 In Enterprise Architect, open the file-based project or template from which you are creating the project on
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  46 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
the repository.
2 Select and execute the 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity' ribbon option.
This ensures your project data is 'clean' and free from errors before being copied to the repository.
Transfer the Project Data
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select 'File to DBMS'.
4In the 'Source Project' field, click on the 
  button and browse for the name of the project file to copy to
the repository.
If the .EAP file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 In the 'Use Data source name' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the ODBC Data Source you
configured to point to your new database.
Click on the OK button. The 'Project Transfer' dialog redisplays.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
10 When the process is complete, you have created a project on a MariaDB database and can now connect to
it and open it from Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  47 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a MariaDB Repository
Creating a MariaDB database is fully documented in the product information provided with your MariaDB installer.
Having created your MariaDB database, use the SQL script provided by Sparx Systems to create the required table
definitions for Enterprise Architect.
You can obtain the scripts from the Sparx Systems website, on the:
Registered Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Registered users) ·
Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Trial users) ·
Third Party Tools
If you are unfamiliar with MariaDB and DBMS systems in general, you might want to consider a suitable front end tool.
HeidiSQL is installed with MariaDB, providing a convenient graphical user interface to enable the creation of databases,
the execution of scripts, and backups and restores.
You might, therefore:
Run HeidiSQL and create a new database 1.
After creating a MariaDB data repository in Enterprise Architect, you must set up the MariaDB ODBC driver.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
Ensure that the collation is set to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  48 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set up a MariaDB ODBC Driver
After you have created a MariaDB database, you will need to set up an ODBC DSN to the new database in order for
Enterprise Architect to connect to it. However Sparx Systems recommend that the MySQL ODBC driver is used to
connect to MariaDB based repositories as the native MariaDB ODBC driver is not fully compatible with connection
methods employed by Enterprise Architect.
Prerequisites
Install:
MariaDB DBMS and repository ·
MySQL ODBC driver software ·
Set up the ODBC Driver
Step Action
1 Under both 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, Enterprise Architect requires 32-bit ODBC drivers to
connect to a repository through ODBC. You can quickly load the correct 32-bit ODBC Data Source
Administrator by selecting the 'Configure > User Tools > ODBC Data Sources' ribbon option.
The ODBC Data Source Administrator window displays.
2 Click on the Add button.
The 'Create New Data Source' dialog displays, enabling you to add a new DSN.
3 Select the appropriate MySQL ODBC Driver from the list.
4 Click on the Finish button.
The 'MySQL Connector/ODBC' dialog displays.
5 Enter these configuration details:
A data source name for the connection ·
A description (optional) ·
The host address of the DBMS server ·
User name and password ·
The database name on the selected server ·
6 To set the advanced options, click on the Details>> button.
7 Select these checkboxes (where provided):
Return matched rows instead of affected rows ('Connection' or 'Cursors/Results' tab) ·
Allow big result sets ('Connection' tab) ·
8 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
9 If the test succeeds, click on the OK button to complete the configuration.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  49 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the test does not succeed, review your settings.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  50 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to a MariaDB Data Repository
To access a project in your MariaDB data repository, you must connect to the data repository from Enterprise Architect.
Prerequisites
The MariaDB repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, EXECUTE and SHOW VIEW access permissions ·
The MariaDB ODBC driver has been set up ·
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to the repository
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the 'Connect to Server' checkbox.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 Click on the 'Use data source name' radio button and on the drop-down arrow in its field.
From the list, select the ODBC driver you have set up to connect to your MariaDB repository.
6 If required, type in a User name and Password.
7 If required, type in an initial catalog.
8 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
9 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; the 'Connection Name & Type' dialog displays.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  51 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
10 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
11 If required, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
This encrypts and hides the connection details of the database from the users that the connection string is
given to.
12 If required, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox to not load the full project view when the model is loaded;
instead, only the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree are loaded.
With this setting, the model loads faster and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small
delays as Enterprise Architect loads specific portions of the model.
13 If required, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox.
To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next three fields (see your administrator for the correct values);
otherwise go to step 17.
14 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
15 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
16 In the 'DSN' field, type the data source name of the database as it appears on the remote machine.
17 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the 'Start Page'; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  52 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in a MySQL Database
To create a project in a repository on MySQL 5, you work through these stages:
Stage 1: Create an empty database repository and set up the data tables ·
Stage 2: Set up the ODBC Driver ·
Stage 3: Perform a project integrity check on the project file you are using as a base (optional, but recommended) ·
Stage 4: Transfer the data ·
Stage 5: Connect to the repository and open the project ·
Prerequisites
A machine with MySQL version 5 or higher installed and running, ·
MySQL 32bit ODBC driver, between versions 5.2.4 and 5.3.6 (other versions are not recommended) ·
Create a MySQL Repository
MySQL supports two different storage engines - InnoDB and MyISAM. In older versions of MySQL MyISAM was the
default storage engine, but from MySQL v5.5 onwards InnoDB is the default. As of Enterprise Architect v13, Sparx
Systems will no longer provide updates to the MyISAM script and recommend all users to choose InnoDB, as it supports
transactions and UTF8.
Step Action
1 Create a new empty database and configure it to your installation's defaults.
2 Load the EASchema_1220_MySQL.sql file from the Sparx Systems website into your SQL management
console of choice (such as MySQL Workbench).
3 Run the script to create the required database schema.
Set Up the ODBC DSN
Step Action
1 Create a suitable ODBC Data Source to point to your new database.
Select these extended options:
'Return matched rows instead of affected rows' ·
'Allow big result sets' ·
Perform a Project Integrity Check
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  53 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Step Action
1 In Enterprise Architect, open the file-based project or template from which you are creating the project on
the repository.
2 Select and execute the 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity' ribbon option.
This ensures your project data is 'clean' and free from errors before being copied to the repository.
Transfer the Project Data
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select 'File to DBMS'.
4In the 'Source Project' field, click on the 
  button and browse for the name of the project file to copy to
the repository.
If the .EAP file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 In the 'Use Data source name' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the ODBC Data Source you
configured to point to your new database.
Click on the OK button. The 'Project Transfer' dialog redisplays.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
10 When the process is complete, you have created a project on a MySQL database and can now connect to it
and open it from Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  54 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a MySQL Repository
Creating a MySQL database is fully documented in the product information provided with your MySQL installer.
Having created your MySQL database, use the SQL script provided by Sparx Systems to create the required table
definitions for Enterprise Architect.
You can obtain the scripts from the Sparx Systems website, on the:
Registered Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Registered users) ·
Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Trial users) ·
Third Party Tools
If you are unfamiliar with MySQL and DBMS systems in general, you might want to consider a suitable front end tool.
MySQL Administrator is one such tool, providing a convenient graphical user interface to enable the creation of
databases, the execution of scripts, and backups and restores.
You might, therefore:
Run MySQL Administrator and create a new database, then 1.
Run MySQL Query Browser, and open and execute the MySQL repository script 2.
After creating a MySQL data repository in Enterprise Architect, you must set up the MySQL ODBC driver.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
Ensure that the collation is set to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  55 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set up a MySQL ODBC Driver
After you have created a MySQL database, you will need to set up an ODBC DSN to the new database in order for
Enterprise Architect to connect to it.
Prerequisites
Install:
MySQL DBMS and repository ·
MySQL 32bit ODBC driver, between versions 5.2.4 and 5.3.6 ·
Set up the ODBC Driver
Your MySQL driver is now available to connect to the repository from Enterprise Architect.
Step Action
1 Under both 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, Enterprise Architect requires 32-bit ODBC drivers to
connect to a repository through ODBC. You can quickly load the correct 32-bit ODBC Data Source
Administrator by selecting the 'Configure > User Tools > ODBC Data Sources' ribbon option.
The ODBC Data Source Administrator window displays.
2 Click on the Add button.
The 'Create New Data Source' dialog displays, enabling you to add a new DSN.
3 Select the appropriate MySQL ODBC Driver from the list.
4 Click on the Finish button.
The 'MySQL Connector/ODBC' dialog displays.
5 Enter these configuration details:
A data source name for the connection ·
A description (optional) ·
The host address of the DBMS server ·
User name and password ·
The database name on the selected server ·
6 To set the advanced options, click on the Details>> button.
7 Select these checkboxes (where provided):
Return matched rows instead of affected rows ('Connection' or 'Cursors/Results' tab) ·
Allow big result sets ('Connection' tab) ·
8 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
9 If the test succeeds, click on the OK button to complete the configuration.
If the test does not succeed, review your settings.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  56 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  57 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to a MySQL Data Repository
To access a project in your MySQL data repository, you must connect to the data repository from Enterprise Architect.
Prerequisites
The MySQL repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, EXECUTE and SHOW VIEW access permissions ·
The MySQL ODBC driver has been set up ·
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to the repository
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the 'Connect to Server' checkbox.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 Click on the 'Use data source name' radio button and on the drop-down arrow in its field.
From the list, select the ODBC driver you have set up to connect to your MySQL repository.
6 If required, type in a User name and Password.
7 If required, type in an initial catalog.
8 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
9 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; the 'Connection Name & Type' dialog displays.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  58 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
10 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
11 If required, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
This encrypts and hides the connection details of the database from the users that the connection string is
given to.
12 If required, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox to not load the full project view when the model is loaded;
instead, only the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree are loaded.
With this setting, the model loads faster and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small
delays as Enterprise Architect loads specific portions of the model.
13 If required, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox.
To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next three fields (see your administrator for the correct values);
otherwise go to step 17.
14 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
15 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
16 In the 'DSN' field, type the data source name of the database as it appears on the remote machine.
17 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the Start Page; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  59 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in an Oracle Database
To create a project in a repository on Oracle 9i, 10g, 11g or 12c, you work through these stages:
Stage 1: Create an empty database repository and set up the data tables ·
Stage 2: Connect to the Oracle repository; Sparx Systems recommends using Oracle Provider for OLE DB - ·
connecting with either Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC or Microsoft OLE DB Provider for Oracle could
cause unexpected behavior or performance issues due to known limitations of those drivers
Stage 3: Perform a project integrity check on the project file you are using as a base (optional, but recommended) ·
Stage 4: Transfer the data ·
Stage 5: Connect to the repository to open the project ·
Prerequisites
A machine with Oracle 9i, 10g or 11 g installed and running ·
Oracle Client installed on the client machine, please ensure that the OLE/DB drivers are installed (you can download ·
the drivers from the Oracle Technology Network web site, as part of the Oracle Data Access Components (ODAC)
package; see Learn more)
Create Database Repository
Step Action
1 Create the empty database.
2 Load the EASchema_1220_Oracle.sql file from the Sparx Systems website into your SQL management
console of choice (such as Oracle SQL Developer).
3 Run the script to create the required database schema.
Perform Project Integrity Check
Step Action
1 Open the file-based project or template.
2 Select and execute the 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity' ribbon option.
This ensures your project data is 'clean' before uploading.
Transfer the project data to the repository
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  60 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select 'File to DBMS'.
4At the right of the 'Source Project' field, click on the 
  button and browse for the name of the project
file to copy to Oracle.
If the file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Oracle Provider for OLE DB' from the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 On the 'Connection' page of the 'Datalink Properties' dialog, enter the Oracle service name in the 'Data
Source' field, and the user name and password as required.
Click on the OK button. The 'Project Transfer' dialog redisplays.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
10 When the process is complete, you have created a project on a Oracle database and can now connect to it
and open it from Enterprise Architect.
Notes
When transferring a project to Oracle you must have access rights to execute the CREATE SEQUENCE command ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  61 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create an Oracle Data Repository
Creating an Oracle database is fully documented in the product information provided with your Oracle installer.
Before creating an Oracle data repository, install the appropriate version of Oracle (9i, 10g, 11g or 12c) and MDAC 2.6
or higher, and obtain access permission to create a new database.
Having created your Oracle database, use the SQL script (Oracle_EASchema.sql) provided by Sparx Systems to create
the required table definitions and indexes for Enterprise Architect. You can obtain the script from the Sparx Systems
website, on the:
Registered Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Registered users), or ·
Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Trial users) ·
When you eventually connect to the Oracle database from Enterprise Architect, Sparx Systems recommends using Oracle
Provider for OLE DB. Connecting with either Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC or Microsoft OLE DB Provider
for Oracle could cause unexpected behavior or performance issues due to known limitations of those drivers.
Third Party Tools
If you are unfamiliar with Oracle and DBMS systems in general, you might want to consider a suitable front end tool.
You could connect to the database and execute the scripts with a program such as Oracle SQL*Plus or SQL Plus
Worksheet.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
The OLE DB client must be the 32-bit version ·
Set the collation to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  62 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set up an Oracle ODBC Driver
After you have created an Oracle database, you can either set up an ODBC DSN to the new database in order for
Enterprise Architect to connect to it, or you configure Enterprise Architect to use the Oracle OLE DB provider in
connection strings to the new database.
Note that Sparx Systems recommends using Oracle Provider for OLE DB. Connecting with either Microsoft OLE DB
Provider for ODBC or Microsoft OLE DB Provider for Oracle could cause unexpected behavior or performance issues
due to known limitations of those drivers.
Prerequisites
Install:
Oracle DBMS and repository ·
Set up the Oracle ODBC driver
Your Oracle driver is now available to connect to the repository from Enterprise Architect.
Step Action
1 Under both 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, Enterprise Architect requires 32-bit ODBC drivers to
connect to a repository through ODBC. You can quickly load the correct 32-bit ODBC Data Source
Administrator by selecting the 'Configure > User Tools > ODBC Data Sources' ribbon option.
The ODBC Data Source Administrator window displays.
2 Click on the Add button.
The 'Create New Data Source' dialog displays, enabling you to add a new DSN.
3 Select 'Oracle in OraDB11g_home1' from the list (or similar, depending on the ODBC installation).
4 Click on the Finish button.
The 'Oracle ODBC Driver Configuration' dialog displays.
5 Enter these configuration details:
A data source name for the connection ·
A description (optional) ·
The TNS Service Name (click on the drop down arrow and select from the list) ·
User ID ·
6 Click on the Test Connection button and enter the Oracle user password to confirm that the details are
correct.
7 If the test succeeds, click on the OK button to complete the configuration.
If the test does not succeed, review your settings.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  63 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to an Oracle Data Repository (ODBC)
To access a project in your Oracle 9i, 10g, 11g or 12c data repository, you connect to the data repository from Enterprise
Architect.
Note that Sparx Systems recommends using Oracle Provider for OLE DB (see Connect to an Oracle Data Repository
(OLE DB)). Connecting with either Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC or Microsoft OLE DB Provider for Oracle
could cause unexpected behavior or performance issues due to known limitations of those drivers.
Prerequisites
The Oracle repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT and DELETE access permissions ·
The Oracle ODBC driver has been set up ·
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to an Oracle Data Repository using an ODBC Driver
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the 'Connect to Server' checkbox.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 In the 'Data source' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the data source name.
6 Type in the User name and Password.
7 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
8 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; Oracle prompts you for the password.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  64 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
9 Type in the password.
The 'Connection Name and Type' dialog displays.
10 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
11 If you want to encrypt and hide the connection details of the database from the users that the connection
string is given to, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
12 The Lazy Load facility does not load the full project view when the model is loaded; instead, it loads only
the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree. With this set, the model loads faster
and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small delays as Enterprise Architect loads
specific portions of the model.
If you want to use the Lazy load facility, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox.
13 To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time. If you are using a
WAN, and want to apply this facility, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox; otherwise go to step
16.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next two fields (see your administrator for the correct values).
14 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
15 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
16 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the Start Page; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  65 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to an Oracle Data Repository (OLE DB)
To access a project in your Oracle 9i, 10g, 11g or 12c data repository, you connect to the data repository from Enterprise
Architect.
Prerequisites
Oracle Client already installed on the client machine, please ensure that the OLE/DB drivers are installed (you can ·
download the drivers from the Oracle Technology Network web site, as part of the Oracle Data Access Components
(ODAC) package; see Learn more)
The Oracle repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT and DELETE access permissions ·
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to an Oracle Repository using OLE DB
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the 'Connect to Server' checkbox.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Oracle Provider for OLE DB' from the list.
Do not select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for Oracle'; Enterprise Architect might not work as expected.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 In the 'Data source' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the data source name (the service name
of the Oracle database).
6 Type in the User name and Password.
7 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
8 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  66 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; the 'Connection Name and Type' dialog displays.
9 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
10 If you want to encrypt and hide the connection details of the database from the users that the connection
string is given to, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
11 If required, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox to not load the full project view when the model is loaded;
instead, only the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree are loaded.
With this setting, the model loads faster and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small
delays as Enterprise Architect loads specific portions of the model.
12 To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time. If you are using a
WAN, and want to apply this facility, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox; otherwise go to step
15.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next two fields (see your administrator for the correct values).
13 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
14 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
15 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the Start Page; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  67 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in a PostgreSQL Database
To create a project in a repository on PostgreSQL, you work through these stages:
Stage 1: Create an empty database repository and set up the data tables ·
Stage 2: Set up the PostgreSQL ODBC Driver ·
Stage 3: Perform a project integrity check on the project file you are using as a base (optional, but recommended) ·
Stage 4: Transfer the data ·
Stage 5: Connect to the repository to open the project ·
Prerequisites
A machine with PostgreSQL 9 or higher installed and running ·
psqlODBC, version 8.03 or higher has been installed (do not use version 8.3.4 or 8.4.1) ·
Create Database Repository
Step Action
1 Create the empty database.
2 Load the EASchema_PostgreSQL_1220.sql file from the Sparx Systems website into your SQL
management console of choice (such as pgAdminIII).
3 Run the script to create the required database schema.
Set Up the ODBC DSN
Step Action
1 Create a suitable ODBC Data Source to point to your new database.
Select these extended options:
Page 1:
 Disable Genetic Optimizer - Uncheck
 Use Declare/Fetch - Check
 Unknowns as LongVarChar - Check
 Bools as Char - Uncheck
 Max Varchar - 1024
 Max LongVarChar - 1000000
Page 2:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  68 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
 bytea as LO - Check
 Disallow Premature - Check
 Protocol - 7.4+
Perform a Project Integrity Check
Step Action
1 In Enterprise Architect, open the file-based project or template from which you are creating the project on
the repository.
2 Select and run the 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity' ribbon option.
This ensures your project data is 'clean' before being copied to the repository.
Transfer the project data to the repository
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select 'File to DBMS'.
4In the 'Source Project' field, click on the 
  button and browse for the name of the project file to copy to
the repository.
If the .EAP file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 On the 'Use Data Source Name' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the ODBC Data Source
you configured to point to your new database.
Click on the OK button. The 'Project Transfer' dialog redisplays.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  69 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
10 When the process is complete, you have created a project on a PostgreSQL database and can now connect
to it and open it from Enterprise Architect.
Notes
During the transfer, if an error message displays reporting '...nonstandard use of \\ in a string literal...', set the server ·
variable in the postgresql.conf file to: escape_string_warning = off
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  70 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a PostgreSQL Repository
Creating a PostgreSQL database is fully documented in the product information provided with your PostgreSQL
installer.
Having created your PostgreSQL database, use the SQL script provided by Sparx Systems to create the required table
definitions for Enterprise Architect. You can obtain the scripts from the Sparx Systems website, on the:
Registered Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Registered users) ·
Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Trial users) ·
Third Party Tools
If you are unfamiliar with PostgreSQL and DBMS systems in general, you might want to consider a suitable front end
tool. One such tool is pgAdminIII. It provides a convenient graphical user interface to enable creation of databases,
execution of scripts and restores.
After creating a PostgreSQL data repository in Enterprise Architect, you must set up the PostgreSQL ODBC driver.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
Ensure that the collation is set to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  71 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set up a PostgreSQL ODBC Driver
After you have created a PostgreSQL database, you will need to set up an ODBC DSN to the new database in order for
Enterprise Architect to connect to it.
Prerequisites
Install:
PostgreSQL DBMS and repository ·
PostgreSQL ODBC driver software version 7.03.01.00 or above (note that versions 8.3.4, 8.4.1 and 9.03 of the ·
PostgreSQL ODBC Driver are not supported)
Set up the ODBC driver
Your PostgreSQL driver is now available to connect to the repository from Enterprise Architect.
Step Action
1 Under both 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, Enterprise Architect requires 32-bit ODBC drivers to
connect to a repository through ODBC. You can quickly load the correct 32-bit ODBC Data Source
Administrator by selecting the 'Configure > User Tools > ODBC Data Sources' ribbon option.
The ODBC Data Source Administrator window displays.
2 Click on the Add button.
The 'Create New Data Source' dialog displays, enabling you to add a new DSN.
3 Select 'PostgreSQL UNICODE' from the list.
4 Click on the Finish button.
The 'Postgre SQL Connector/ODBC' dialog displays.
5 Enter these configuration details:
A data source name for the connection ·
The actual name of the database ·
The host address of the DBMS server ·
User name ·
A description (optional) ·
The password ·
6 To set the advanced options, click on the Datasource button and set the options on 'Page 1' as shown:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  72 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Note: From version 9.5.4 onwards some options shown in this image are no longer available and can be
ignored.
7 If you are using PostgreSQL version 8 to 9.5.4, set the options on Page 2 as shown:
The 'Disallow Premature' checkbox should be checked ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  73 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
In the 'Protocol' panel, the '7.4+' radio button should be selected ·
Note: From version 9.5.4 onwards the two options are no longer available and can be ignored.
8 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  74 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to a PostgreSQL Data Repository
To access a project in your MySQL data repository, you must connect to the data repository from Enterprise Architect.
Prerequisites
The PostgreSQL repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT and DELETE access permissions ·
The PostgreSQL ODBC driver has been set up ·
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to the repository
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the 'Connect to Server' checkbox.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 Click on the 'Use data source name' radio button and on the drop-down arrow in its field.
From the list, select the ODBC driver you have set up to connect to your PostgreSQL repository.
6 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
7 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; the 'Connection Name & Type' dialog displays.
8 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
9 If required, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  75 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
This encrypts and hides the connection details of the database from the users that the connection string is
given to.
10 If required, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox to not load the full project view when the model is loaded;
instead, only the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree are loaded.
With this setting, the model loads faster and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small
delays as Enterprise Architect loads specific portions of the model.
11 If required, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox.
To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next three fields (see your administrator for the correct values);
otherwise go to step 15.
12 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
13 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
14 In the 'DSN' field, type the data source name of the database as it appears on the remote machine.
15 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the Start Page; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  76 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in an Access 2007 Database
In setting up a project in an Access 2007 repository, you could be working in one of two situations:
You are able to work in Access 2007 itself, in which case you can convert your .eap project directly to an Access ·
2007 .accdb database file, which you can connect to and open in Enterprise Architect
You have access to an empty Access 2007 .accdb file, and need to transfer a .eap project into that .accdb file ·
In either case, before you convert or transfer the project data, you could perform a project integrity check on the .eap file
you are using as a base (optional, but recommended).
Prerequisites
The 'Microsoft Office 12.0 Access Database Engine OLE DB Provider' ODBC driver installed ·
Perform a Project Integrity Check
Step Action
1 Open the base project or template .eap file.
2 Select and run 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity'.
This ensures your project data is 'clean' before uploading.
Convert a .eap file in Access 2007
Step Action
1 Open MS Access 2007 and open the source .eap file within this product.
Allow Access to convert the .eap file to a .accdb file. This forms the Access 2007 repository.
Transfer the project data into an empty .accdb file
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select 'File to DBMS'.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  77 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
4 In the 'Source Project' field, type the name of the .EAP file to copy to the repository.
If the .EAP file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Microsoft Office 12.0 Access Database Engine OLE DB Provider' from the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 On the 'Data Source Details' page of the 'Datalink Properties' dialog, type in the full path to the Access
2007 .accdb file.
Click on the OK button to return to the 'Project Transfer' dialog.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
When the process is complete, you have created your project in an Access 2007 database and can now
open it directly from Enterprise Architect, browsing for the .accdb file location in the 'Open Project'
dialog.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
If you do not have Access 2007, you can download the Access Database Engine from the Microsoft downloads site ·
Ensure that the collation is set to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  78 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in a SQL Server Database
To create a project on a repository in SQL Server 2005 and above, or SQL Server Express 2005 and above, work through
these stages:
Stage 1: Create an empty database repository and set up the data tables ·
Stage 2: Perform a project integrity check on the project file you are using as a base (optional, but recommended) ·
Stage 3: Transfer the data ·
Stage 4: Connect to the repository to open the project ·
Prerequisites
A machine with SQL Server installed and running ·
MDAC 2.6 or higher on the client machine ·
Permissions to create databases on SQL Server (see the SQL Server Security Permissions Help topic) ·
ALTER permission on the t_image table in Enterprise Architect, to be able to import model images ·
Create a SQL Server Repository
Step Action
1 Create a new empty database.
2 Load the EASchema_1220_SQLServer.sql file from the Sparx Systems website into your SQL
management console of choice (such as Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio).
3 Run the script to create the required database schema.
Perform a Project Integrity Check
Step Action
1 In Enterprise Architect, open the file-based project or template from which you are creating the project on
the repository.
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity' ribbon option, and execute the check.
This ensures your project data is 'clean' before being copied to the repository.
Transfer the project data to the repository
Step Action
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  79 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select '.EAP to DBMS'.
4 In the 'Source Project' field, type the name of the project file to copy to the repository.
If the .EAP file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for SQL Server' or 'Microsoft OLE DB Driver for SQL Server' from
the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 On the 'Data Source Details' page of the 'Datalink Properties' dialog, type in the server name, database
name and any security details required.
Click on the OK button. The 'Project Transfer' dialog redisplays.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
10 When the process is complete, you have created a project on a SQL Server database and can now connect
to it and open it from Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  80 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a SQL Server Repository
Creating a SQL Server database is fully documented in the product information provided with your SQL Server installer.
Having created your SQL Server database, use the SQL script provided by Sparx Systems to create the required table
definitions for Enterprise Architect. You can obtain the script from the Sparx Systems website, on the Corporate edition
'Resources' page.
If you are unfamiliar with SQL Server and DBMS systems in general, you might want to consider a suitable front end
tool, such as SQL Server Management Studio.
SQL Enterprise Manager example
Step Action
1 In SQL Server Management Studio, locate the server on which to create your new project; for example:
DBSERVER02\SQLEXPRESS.
2 Right-click and choose the 'New Database' option.
3 Enter a suitable name for the database. Set any file options as required.
Ensure that the database collation is set to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic, and
case-insensitive.
4 Click on the database to select it, then select the 'New Query' menu option.
5 In the Query window, use the 'Open File' dialog to locate the EASchema_1220_SQLServer.sql script file.
6 Click on the Open button. In the drop-down menu, check that you have selected the correct database to
run the script in.
7 Click on the Execute button; SQL Server executes the script, which creates the base tables for an
Enterprise Architect project.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
You should have ALTER permission on the t_image table in Enterprise Architect, to be able to import model images ·
When creating a project in a SQL Server database you must have 'db_ddladmin' permission in order to execute the ·
SET IDENTITY_INSERT (table) {ON | OFF} command
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  81 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
SQL Server Security Permissions
The security model implemented by Microsoft's SQL Server is quite powerful and highly configurable, supporting many
different possible solutions for securing the data contained in SQL Server databases and ensuring it is only accessible to
users with the required permissions. For a more detailed description and explanation of SQL Server permissions, see the
SQL Server documentation.
Enterprise Architect users who plan to add, edit and delete contents in a SQL Server repository must have permissions to
execute SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT and DELETE statements on all Tables in the Enterprise Architect database. The
easiest way to achieve this is to grant the database roles of 'db_datareader' and 'db_datawriter' to each user.
Additional Permissions for Project Transfers
When an Enterprise Architect repository is transferred into a SQL Server based repository, it is necessary for Enterprise
Architect to execute a number of SET IDENTITY_INSERT (table) {ON | OFF} commands during the process. This
means the user performing the transfer must have a high level of security, in the role of 'db_ddladmin'.
Does Enterprise Architect support Windows Authentication?
Enterprise Architect does support Windows Authentication. However, the type of authentication is determined by the
configuration of the connection used, and not by Enterprise Architect.
Windows Authentication to SQL Server is commonly used by Enterprise Architect users, but this requires that all
Windows users in Enterprise Architect be defined on the SQL Server server and be granted the security roles
'db_datareader' and 'db_datawriter' for the repository.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  82 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to a SQL Server Data Repository
After you have created a Microsoft SQL Server database, you can connect to it immediately without any further
configuration directly from Enterprise Architect.
Prerequisites
The SQL Server repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT and DELETE access permissions ·
You have ALTER permission on the t_image table in Enterprise Architect, to be able to import model images ·
Microsoft OLE DB Provider for SQL (this is usually part of the Windows Operating System, otherwise install ·
MDAC 2.8)
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to the repository
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the 'Connect to Server' checkbox.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for SQL Server' or 'Microsoft OLE DB Driver for SQL Server' from
the list.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 Type in the server details, including Server Name, User Name and Password.
6 Click on the 'Select the database on the server' option and on the drop-down arrow.
From the list, select the project to connect to.
7 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
8 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  83 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; the 'Connection Name & Type' dialog displays.
9 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
10 If required, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
This encrypts and hides the connection details of the database from the users that the connection string is
given to.
11 If required, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox to not load the full project view when the model is loaded;
instead, only the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree are loaded.
With this setting, the model loads faster and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small
delays as Enterprise Architect loads specific portions of the model.
12 If required, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox.
To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next two fields (see your administrator for the correct values);
otherwise go to step 15.
13 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
14 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
15 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the Start Page; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  84 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Project in a Sybase ASA/SQL Anywhere Database
To create a project in a repository on Sybase Adaptive Server Anywhere 8 or 9, or SQL Anywhere 10, 11 or 12, you
work through these stages:
Stage 1: Create an empty database repository ·
Stage 2: Set up the ASA ODBC Driver ·
Stage 3: Perform a project integrity check on the project file you are using as a base (optional, but recommended) ·
Stage 4: Transfer the data ·
Stage 5: Connect to the repository and open the project ·
Prerequisites
A machine with Adaptive Server Anywhere installed and running ·
Install SQL Anywhere Studio, this also installs the ASA ODBC driver ·
Create Database Repository
Step Action
1 Create a new empty database.
2 Load the EASchema_1220_ SybaseASA.sql file from the Sparx Systems website into your SQL
management console of choice (such as Sybase Central).
3 Run the script to create the required database schema.
Set up the ODBC DSN
Step Action
1 Create a suitable ODBC Data Source to point to your new database.
Perform Project Integrity Check
Step Action
1 In Enterprise Architect, open the file-based project or template from which you are creating the project on
the repository.
2 Select and run 'Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity'.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  85 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
This ensures your project data is 'clean' before being copied to the repository.
Transfer the Project Data
Step Action
1 Open Enterprise Architect.
(If the 'Open Project' dialog displays, click on the Cancel button to open with no project loaded.)
2 Select the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Project Transfer' ribbon option.
The 'Project Transfer' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Transfer Type' panel, select '.EAP to DBMS'.
4 In the 'Source Project' field, type the name of the project file to copy to the repository.
If the .EAP file has Replication enabled, this must be removed before performing the transfer.
5At the right of the 'Target Project' field, click on the 
  button.
The 'Datalink Properties' dialog displays.
6 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
Click on the Next button.
7 In the 'Use Data source name' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the ODBC Data Source you
configured to point to your new database.
Click on the OK button. The 'Project Transfer' dialog redisplays.
8 If required, select the 'Logfile' checkbox and type a path and filename for the data transfer log file.
9 Click on the Transfer button to begin the data transfer process.
10 When the process is complete, you have created a project on an ASA database and can now connect to it
and open it from Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  86 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create an Adaptive Server Anywhere Repository
Creating an ASA database is fully documented in the product information provided with your ASA installer.
Having created your ASA database, use the SQL script (ASA_EASchema.sql) provided by Sparx Systems to create the
required table definitions for Enterprise Architect. You can obtain the scripts from the Sparx Systems website, on the:
Registered Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Registered users) ·
Corporate edition 'Resources' page (Trial users) ·
Third Party Tools
If you are unfamiliar with ASA and DBMS systems in general, you might want to consider a suitable front end tool.
Sybase Central is one such tool, that can be installed along with the DBMS. It provides a convenient graphical user
interface to enable creation of databases, execution of scripts and restores.
After creating an ASA data repository in Enterprise Architect, you must set up the ASA ODBC driver.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
Ensure that the collation is set to the alphabet you use, such as Latin or Cyrillic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  87 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set up an ASA ODBC Driver
After you have created a Sybase ASA database, you will need to set up an ODBC DSN to the new database in order for
Enterprise Architect to connect to it.
Prerequisites
Install:
Adaptive Server Anywhere - SQL Anywhere Studio 8 or higher, and create a repository ·
ASA ODBC driver software (installed with the ASA DBMS) ·
Set up the ODBC Driver
Your ASA driver is now available to connect to the repository from Enterprise Architect.
Step Action
1 Under both 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems, Enterprise Architect requires 32-bit ODBC drivers to
connect to a repository through ODBC. You can quickly load the correct 32-bit ODBC Data Source
Administrator by selecting the 'Configure > User Tools > ODBC Data Sources' ribbon option.
The ODBC Data Source Administrator window displays.
2 Click on the Add button.
The 'Create New Data Source' dialog displays, enabling you to add a new DSN.
3 Select 'Adaptive Server Anywhere' or 'SQL Anywhere' from the list.
4 Click on the Finish button.
The 'ASA Connector/ODBC' dialog displays.
5 Enter these configuration details:
A data source name for the connection, on the 'ODBC' tab ·
User name and password on the 'Login' tab (dba, sql are the defaults when ASA is installed) ·
The server name and the path to the database, on the 'Database' tab ·
The network protocol on the 'Network' tab (if the database is on a network location) ·
6 Return to the 'ODBC' tab and click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
7 If the test succeeds, click on the OK button to complete the configuration.
If the test does not succeed, review your settings.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  88 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to an ASA Data Repository
To access a project in your Adaptive Server Anywhere (ASA) data repository, you must connect to the data repository
from Enterprise Architect.
Prerequisites
The ASA repository and the project already exist ·
You have SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT and DELETE access permissions ·
The ASA ODBC driver has been set up ·
Access
Ribbon
: Open Project
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+O
Connect to the repository
Step Action
1 In the 'Open Project' dialog, select the Connect to Server button.
2Click on the 
  button.
The 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays.
3 Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' from the list.
4 Click on the Next>> button.
The 'Connection' tab displays.
5 Click on the 'Use data source name' radio button and on the drop-down arrow in its field.
From the list, select the ODBC driver you have set up to connect to your ASA repository.
6 Click on the Test Connection button to confirm that the details are correct.
7 If the test does not succeed, revise your settings.
If the test succeeds, click on the OK button; the 'Connection Name & Type' dialog displays.
8 Give the connection a suitable name so that you can recognize it in the 'Recent Projects' panel on the
'Open Project' dialog.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  89 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
9 If required, select the 'Encrypt Connection String' checkbox.
This encrypts and hides the connection details of the database from the users that the connection string is
given to.
10 If required, select the 'Lazy Load' checkbox to not load the full project view when the model is loaded;
instead, only the parts that are necessary to display the visible portion of the tree are loaded.
With this setting, the model loads faster and users can begin work sooner, but at the expense of later small
delays as Enterprise Architect loads specific portions of the model.
11 If required, select the 'Use WAN Optimization' checkbox.
To improve performance over a Wide Area Network, remote database calls can be routed through a WAN
Optimizer that compresses the data returned from the repository, reducing transfer time.
If you select this checkbox, complete the next three fields (see your administrator for the correct values);
otherwise go to step 15.
12 In the 'Server' field, type the network name or address of the optimizer server.
13 In the 'Port' field, type the port on which the server is running on the remote machine.
14 In the 'DSN' field, type the data source name of the database as it appears on the remote machine.
15 Click on the OK button to complete the configuration and open the project.
This also adds the project name to the 'Recent' list on the Start Page; from now on, you can open the
project again just by clicking on this name.
Notes
This feature is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  90 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The WAN Optimizer
You can significantly improve Enterprise Architect's performance in a Wide Area Network (WAN) by reducing the
amount of data transmitted and, in turn, the number of network calls made. To achieve this, you can use the Sparx
Systems Wide Area Network (WAN) Optimizer, a lightweight server installed on a Local Area Network (LAN)
connection to a Database Management System (DBMS) that hosts an Enterprise Architect repository. You can configure
the server to listen for client connections on a particular port; it acts as a local proxy to execute queries and return the
results in a compressed format to the client.
In this diagram, transmission between Enterprise Architect and a DBMS is depicted first without and then with the WAN
Optimizer.
You can download the WAN Optimizer installer from the 'Downloads' page of the Registered Users section of the Sparx
Systems website. The Wan Optimizer Service installer package provides two installable features for the target machine:
WAN Optimizer Service - the installer also helps register and start the service on the target machine, and add it to ·
the Windows Startup folder
WAN Optimizer Admin Client - to enable an administrator to administer and configure the service from a remote ·
client
The Optimizer has its own Sparx Systems WAN Optimizer User Guide. See that Guide for more information on:
WAN Optimizer Components ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  91 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Installing and Starting the WAN Optimizer Service ·
Configuring the Service ·
Troubleshooting ·
Notes
The WAN optimizer forms the basis for the Sparx Systems Cloud Services, which in turn is the core of the Sparx ·
Systems Pro Cloud Server
Both of these facilities provide the basic function of the WAN Optimizer, but do so faster and more securely; they
also have many more additional features
Whilst you can still use the WAN Optimizer as described here, we recommend that you review the Cloud Services
products and use one of them instead
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  92 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Based Repositories
With a simple connection to the internet or web - the 'Cloud' - you can access and work on projects stored in repositories
at remote locations anywhere in the world, or access local repositories from such locations, using the Enterprise
Architect installation on your machine. The advantages of working in this way include:
You, as a user, do not need to have database drivers installed on your machine or to create a database connection, as ·
you do to work directly on projects held on a DBMS server; your system administrator performs the driver set-up
and connection once only, during server configuration
The http and, especially, https connections apply a firewall and all the security facilities provided by the web server - ·
whether Apache or IIS - to your project work, such as URL authorization, domain authentication and IP security
The Cloud Server can be configured to encrypt all communications using standard TLS/SSL protocols; you can be ·
certain that your data is not intercepted during transmission across insecure networks
Using the Cloud can help to reduce lag time for common tasks such as opening Packages and editing model data.
Requests are cached and sent together, rather than individually, which minimizes communication delays.
Using the Cloud server is most beneficial when:
You and other users want to minimize the set-up requirements each user has on their workstation ·
You want to expose models held outside your private network ·
You and other users are accessing your models over slow connections ·
Notes
This facility is integrated with the Professional, Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
An enhanced version of Cloud Services, called Pro Cloud Server, is available for purchase under a separate license; ·
this version supports the WebEA facility, in which users can review models through a web browser on various
portable devices, without the need for an Enterprise Architect workstation client
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  93 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Introducing Cloud Services
The Sparx Systems Cloud Services solution provides seamless access to Enterprise Architect models in repositories held
anywhere in the world, providing high performance for remote access, secure encrypted links and optimization for high
latency WAN connections.
Cloud-based repositories provide easy access to models, not only for people within your local team but also for remote
team members, external customers and consultants with Internet access, anywhere around the world. Collaborative and
distributive modeling and design are dramatically enhanced by using a Cloud-based repository, which can provide the
shared backbone for a wealth of development scenarios.
This section will:
Familiarize you with the concepts of the Cloud Services 1.
Discuss considerations of when and where you should use a Cloud server 2.
Walk you through the process of setting up a server 3.
Walk you through the process of connecting for the first time 4.
Highlight some of the additional functionality available through the Cloud server 5.
Outline working with Active Directory using IIS 6.
Overview
Enterprise Architect models are stored in databases, such as MySQL, SQL Server and Oracle. Traditional installations of
Enterprise Architect require each user to install the appropriate drivers for each DBMS, and in some cases define an
ODBC DSN with the database connection details.
When connecting to a Cloud Server, the procedure for a user to connect to a model is dramatically simplified. For users
connecting to models stored in a Cloud Server, the process is as simple as entering a single URL to the provided Cloud
repository. No special drivers or further configuration is required.
Connecting to a Cloud Server provides a number of key benefits:
Improved performance for models used for distributed development. The Cloud Server provides benefits to 1.
connections that involve high latency and reduced data transfer speeds.
The process of setting up drivers and connections is performed once by an administrator during the server 2.
configuration. The only set-up required on a user machine is to install Enterprise Architect and to connect to a model
on the Cloud server.
Database servers no longer have to be exposed through a firewall; the Cloud server can be run from inside the 3.
corporate firewall. All model connections are created using HTTP, allowing firewalls to completely isolate your
database server.
A Cloud server can be configured to encrypt all communication. Using standard TLS/SSL protocols, you can be 4.
confident that your data is not intercepted during transmission on insecure networks.
A Cloud server can be configured to provide HTTP-level authorization to any model taken directly from the model 5.
user list. Even when the model is exposed on a public network, you can be assured that only authorized users are
able to access your model.
A Cloud server can be configured to provide read-only access to any model; for example, for clients required to 6.
review a model.
Security Considerations
The Sparx Systems Cloud Service runs as a Windows Service, accepting network connections from Enterprise Architect
clients and sending the data required by the system back over the network. As with any web connected service, there are
security concerns that must be addressed when setting up a new service. To help you minimize risks, consider these
points:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  94 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If any data is considered private, always use an HTTPS connection and require user authentication; there is an ·
option on each of the service's database configurations to prompt for this
There is an implicit trust in sharing a model with anyone; security is available in models, which prevents a wide ·
range of possible interactions, but with Enterprise Architect's flexibility determined users can circumvent this
In particular, Model Search SQL queries can be run in a number of places that allow data to be read that would not
otherwise be accessible, including user IDs and hashes of their passwords; to block this type of access for a list of
users, you could use Global Authentication instead of Model Authentication, as discussed in the Cloud Server
Configuration Help topic
Cloud Services Products
Sparx Systems offer three configurations of their Cloud Services product.
Product Description
Cloud Services The core Cloud Services product.
Allows you to host an unlimited number of Cloud Models, which can be accessed
using a Corporate, Unified or Ultimate edition of Enterprise Architect.
Pro Cloud Express A light weight version of the Pro Cloud Server, specifically aimed at allowing
WebEA access. Offered for free to users with five or more Enterprise Architect
licenses (Corporate edition or higher) that are currently in maintenance.
Pro Cloud Express license expiry matches the maintenance expiry of the Enterprise
Architect licenses.
Features:
The core Cloud Services functionality ·
Models can be configured to support WebEA access ·
There is no limit to the number of models that can have WebEA access enabled;
however, the number of concurrent WebEA users is limited based on the number of
Pro Cloud Express licenses.
Pro Cloud Server A separately purchased and licensed product.
Features:
The core Cloud Services functionality ·
The Sparx Systems Keystore and floating license server ·
Models can be configured to support Pro Features (WebEA access, Row-level ·
security, and OSLC restful api access)
The number and type of models that can be configured to support Pro Features is
limited based on the edition of Pro Cloud Server; however, there is no limit on the
number of concurrent users who can access models (either via Enterprise Architect
or WebEA).
Webinar
Before you go on to set up the Cloud Server, Sparx Systems recommend that you watch the 'Introduction to Sparx
Systems Cloud Services' webinar, which you can access by clicking on this link:
https://sparxsystems.com/resources/webinar/model-repository/cloud/introduction/introduction-cloud-services.html
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  95 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
You can also watch this second webinar, which demonstrates setting up a MySQL repository on the Amazon Web
Services (AWS) Cloud using Amazon Relational Database Services (RDS), and creating and configuring an Enterprise
Architect project in the repository via the Cloud connection.
https://sparxsystems.com/resources/webinar/partners/cloud-server/amazon/deploy-enterprise-architect-model-on-amazon
-cloud-aws.html
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  96 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Server Setup Overview
This is an overview of the typical process for setting up the Cloud Server.
Typical steps for setting up a Cloud Server
Step Description
1 Install the Cloud Server.
2 Define the Cloud Service SERVER_PORT and SERVER_PASSWORD in the 'SSCloudServices.config'
file.
3 Restart the Cloud Service.
4 Open the Configuration Client.
5 If you are using the Pro Cloud, add your license key.
6 Define Ports to be used for accessing Cloud Models.
7 Define connections to your repositories.
8 Restart the Cloud Service.
9 Configure your Firewall.
10 Test access to models via Cloud Connection from Enterprise Architect.
11 Optionally, if you are using the Pro Cloud Server or Pro Cloud Server Express you could then configure
Pro features such as WebEA or Integration Plugins.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  97 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Server Installation
The basic installation process is quite straightforward and you, as the System or Network Administrator, can install
and/or configure some of the components at a later time, allowing you to set up your working service in stages.
As outlined in the Introducing Cloud Services topic, there are 3 different Cloud Services products available. Each of
these products has its own installer. Ensure you use the appropriate installer based on your requirements and licence/s:
Installers
Product Access
Sparx Systems Cloud
Services
(SparxCloud.msi)This installer can be downloaded from the 'Registered User' section of the Sparx
Systems website:
https://sparxsystems.com.au/registered/index.html#cloud-services
Sparx Systems Pro Cloud
Server Express
(SparxProCloudExpress.ms
i)If you have requested and received a Pro Cloud Server Express license then you
will have received an email with a link to the installer.
Sparx Systems Pro Cloud
Server
(SparxProCloud.msi)If you have purchased the Pro Cloud Server you will have received an email with a
link to the installer.
Installation Steps
If you already have the Sparx System WAN optimizer installed on your server we recommend you remove it before
starting the Cloud Server Installation.
The installer requires you to have Administration rights; right-click on the installer (msi file), select 'Run as
Administrator', then follow these steps:
Click on the Next button. 1.
Select the option to accept the End User Licence Agreement. 2.
Click on the Next button on that page, and on the next two pages of the dialog, to display the 'Select Features' page. 3.
For a simple default installation on the one machine, go straight to step 6. 4.
If you want to install only specific components, for example, to have different components on separate machines, 5.
refer to the Cloud Server Components table and the Installation Options table, then return here to step 6.
Click on the Next button. The system installs the Cloud Services components and displays a message to indicate 6.
success.
Click on the Finish button. Now refer to the Cloud Server Configuration Help topic. 7.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  98 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Server Components
The 'Custom Setup' page lists the various components that are available in the installer. There is some variation to the
component presented depending on which product/edition of the Pro Cloud Server is being installed.
For example the Pro Cloud Server Express will present:
     All Features
        + Pro Cloud Services
        + Management Client
        + WebEA
        - IIS Integration
While the "Pro Cloud Server" will present:
      All Features
        + Pro Cloud Services
        + Management Client
        + WebEA
        + Integration Plugins
        + Visibility Levels
        - IIS Integration
Each component can be controlled separately by clicking the small image in front of the component name and selecting
the option you require.
Component Description
Cloud Services This component is the Windows service that will accept connections from
Enterprise Architect and the configuration client. For Pro Cloud Server, this
includes the Sparx Systems Floating License Server. The default option is to install
this component.
Generally, the only time you would choose not to install this component is when
you have already installed it on one machine and are now installing other
components on a different machine.
Management Client When the Management Client component is selected the Cloud Configuration
Client application will be installed, which supports the execution of management
tasks, including:
- setting which databases a Cloud Service can connect to
- configuring those database connections
- configuring what HTTP/HTTPS ports the Cloud Service will listen on
- configuring various server options
The default option is to install the component; Sparx Systems recommends that the
Configuration Client should be installed whenever the Cloud Service is installed.
WebEA (For a Pro Cloud or Pro Cloud Express Installation); this component installs the
WebEA application files (PHP, CSS and JavaScript) that enable a web user to view
an Enterprise Architect model on a mobile, android or remote desktop machine
without having to install Enterprise Architect on that device.
The default option is to install this component; you can unselect this component if
you do not plan to use WebEA.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page  99 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Integration Plugins (For a Pro Cloud installation) Integration Plugins or Server Based Plugin Interface
(SBPI); this component installs the SBPI Server and the SBPI Plugins that allow
the Pro Cloud Server to read data from external products such as Dropbox, Jira and
Team Foundation Server.
The default option is to install this component; you can unselect the component if
you do not plan to link your Enterprise Architect models to external products.
Visibility Levels (For a Pro Cloud installation) Visibility Levels; this component installs a set of
SQL scripts to be applied to your MS SQL Server 2016 + or Oracle based
Enterprise Architect repositories.
The default option is install this component; you can unselect this component if you
do not plan to use the Visibility Level functionality.
IIS Integration An optional component providing integration with IIS.
The default option is to not install this component; however, if your server requires
advanced authentication methods available through IIS then this component should
be installed.
Installing New Versions
If you are installing a newer version of the same Cloud Server product then the new installer will automatically uninstall
the old version; if, however, you are installing a different product (for example, you previously had Pro Cloud Express
and you are about to install Pro Cloud) then you need to manually uninstall the original product.
If you choose to perform a re-install, typically it is better to manually stop the Sparx System Cloud Server service
because the installer might have problems performing this task and will require the machine to be rebooted after the
installation is finished.
Note: The installer has been designed to not override any configuration settings of a previous installation.
Steps
1. Run the installer using the earlier installation steps.
2. The installer will have copied the newest version of WebEA to the location specified during installation; if this
location is not being used by your web server, you need to manually copy (and override) all WebEA files (except the
includes/webea_config.ini file) from the installation folder to the web server folder. See WebEA Note.
WebEA Note: In regard to WebEA, consider the situation that WebEA was installed to the default location and your
website is being served by Apache in C:\Xampp\htdocs\webea, this command would perform the required copy:
    robocopy "C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\WebEA" "C:\xampp\htdocs\webea" /MIR /e
/DCOPY:T /njh /ndl /nfl /xf webea_config*.ini
Firewall Note: The installer creates a Firewall rule for the Cloud Service. This rule is removed and re-created during an
upgrade. If you had previously modified this rule then you will need to apply these changes again after the Cloud Service
installation.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 100 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Server Configuration
This topic discusses the configuration of the Cloud Server, whether as the original Sparx Systems Cloud Services or as a
component of the Pro Cloud Server. If you are installing the Pro Cloud Server, there are several other configuration files
associated with the Floating License Server, WebEA and Visibility Levels components of the server. The procedures for
editing those files are described in the separate topics for those features.
The SERVER_PORT and SERVER_PASSWORD need to be set by directly editing the configuration file
SSCloudServices.config, which is found in your Service directory. To edit the configuration file, open it in a text editor
(using the 'Run as administrator' option).
A number of additional general options can be defined in the config file as described here; however, these can typically
be left with their default values.
After defining the Server Port/Password, you can open the Cloud Services Configuration Client and configure Ports and
Model/Database connections.
Note: It is important to realize that the Cloud Service only reads the configuration file once, when it starts up. If you
manually change the options in the configuration file then the Cloud Service must be restarted.
Configuration Client Connection Settings
Normally the first settings you will see in the configuration file are to control how the Configuration Client will connect
to the server. The default values are:
    SERVER_PORT=803
    SERVER_PASSWORD=
Use of the Configuration Client is discussed in the Cloud Services Configuration Client topic.
Setting Description
SERVER_PASSWORD SERVER_PASSWORD is the password to protect the administration functions of
the server.
Note: This can be changed within the Configuration Client, which means a full
server restart will not be necessary.
SERVER_PORT SERVER_PORT is used when you connect to the Configuration Client or opt to
use the IIS integration instead of the integrated web-server. For more detail see the
Cloud Server Using IIS Help topic.
Note: When changing this, check firewall settings and other services using the port.
Additionally, when the service is running on Wine you should not use privileged
ports - those below 1024. Under Wine, most applications are only able to listen on
ports above 1024.
General Settings
The next list of settings includes the default global settings across the entire service:
    DBMAN_DEFAULTMAXSIMQUERIES=10
    AUDIT_TIME_PERIOD=3600
    TEMP_DIRECTORY=%SERVICE_PATH%\Temp
    LOGGING_LEVEL=SYSTEM
    LOGGING_DIRECTORY=%SERVICE_PATH%\Logs
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 101 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
    LOGGING_FILECOUNT=3
    LOGGING_FILESIZE=1048576
Setting Description
DBMAN_DEFAULTMAX
SIMQUERIESThe default for the maximum number of simultaneous queries that can be run at a
time for any configured database. This can be changed directly within the
Management Client (see Default Max Simultaneous Queries under Global Server
Options in the Cloud Services Configuration Client topic). There is no explicit limit
for this default value.
Note: As this can be set directly within the Configuration Client, a full server restart
will not be required if you change it.
AUDIT_TIME_PERIOD The number of seconds between the recording activities by system logs on each
database.
TEMP_DIRECTORY The location to write temporary files before they are sent to clients. You should not
generally have to change this.
LOGGING_LEVEL Determines how verbose the server should be when writing log files. The valid
values are: OFF, FATAL, WARNING, INFO and SYSTEM. The value can be
changed directly within the Management Client. (See Log Level under Global
Server Options in the Cloud Services Configuration Client topic).
Note: As this can be set directly within the Configuration Client, a full server restart
will not be required if you change it.
LOGGING_DIRECTORY Defines where the log files are to be stored. The default is set to:
    =%SERVICE_PATH%\Logs
Note: The =%SERVICE_PATH% refers to the directory where the Cloud service is
installed.
LOGGING_FILECOUNT Determines the maximum number of rolling log files that should be kept. When the
file count is exceeded, the oldest file is automatically deleted.
LOGGING_FILESIZE Determines the maximum file size of each log file. When the logging file size is
reached a new log file is created.
For more details on using the logs see the Cloud Server Troubleshooting topic.
Restarting the Sparx Cloud Service
If you make any changes to the configuration file you must restart the service for the changes to take effect (unless
otherwise stated). A service restart is carried out in the Windows Services application.
Depending on the operating system, there are two methods for restarting the Cloud Service:
1) Using Windows Services. This is available in all versions of Windows (see 'Control Panel | Administrative Tools |
Services').
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 102 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
2) Using the Server Manager on Windows Server 2012.
Notes
If you need to assign passwords to user IDs for a model or models that will be accessed via the Cloud, then:
Open the reference model using a direct connection or via a Cloud connection on a port that does not have either 1.
MODEL_AUTHENTICATION or GLOBAL_AUTHENTICATION set.
Enable security and assign a new administrator password. 2.
Open the Cloud Server Management Client for the new database and set the checkbox 'Require a secure and 3.
authenticated connection'. (Now that you have a valid account, this model will no longer be accessible without https
and http level authentication.)
Connect to the model on a port that does have an _AUTHENTICATION setting and use the Maintain Users 4.
procedure to assign passwords to the user IDs in the model.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 103 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Services Configuration Client
At any point after installation you can configure the Cloud Server using the Configuration Client application; the
installer will create a Cloud Services Configuration Client shortcut on the desktop (this name might vary slightly
depending on which of the Cloud Service Products you installed).
By default the Configuration Client executable is accessible from the 'C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud
Services\Client' folder.
The Configuration Client can be used from any machine on your local network; however, communications between it
and the Cloud Service are not secure, so it should not be used from outside a secure network.
The Configuration Client is used to configure various settings related to the Cloud Service and the repositories it
connects to. When the application first starts, a prompt displays to log into a Cloud Service (see the Cloud Services 
Logon Screen topic for details). Once you have logged in, the main screen displays.
The Main Screen
This screen shows a list of all defined database managers and the details of the connected Cloud Service. It is also the
entry point for all management functions; that is, new database connections can be created, existing ones edited and old
ones removed.
Sparx Systems Cloud Services support connections to these DBMS products:
Firebird ·
Microsoft SQL Server ·
MySQL ·
Oracle·
PostgreSQL ·
Item Description
Database Managers This panel lists the defined repositories that the Cloud Service managers. Each
database manager definition contains the details of one database connection and a
number of other properties that control how the database connection will be
managed. The most important of these properties are displayed as columns in this
list:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 104 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Columns
Database Manager - the database connection string of the repository
Alias - a unique name that identifies the repository. On Enterprise Architect's
'Cloud Connection' screen this is the value entered into the 'Model Name' field. An
alias can be assigned when a database manager is defined, if this field is left blank
the Cloud Service will determine its value.
Connections - the number of active user connections and the maximum number of
connections possible. Note: typically the number of active user connections is zero,
since they are only considered 'active' while a request is being processed, as soon as
the data is returned to the client the connection is set to inactive. The number of
connections is only refreshed when either the Refresh button is pressed or a change
is made to a database manager's definition.
Enabled - a flag to indicate if the database manager accepts requests from clients
R/O - a flag to indicate if the database manager has been configured as Read-Only
SSL - a flag to indicate if the database manager has been configured to only allow
secure connections
Pro - a flag to indicates if 'Pro features' has been enabled for the repository, this is
controlled by the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)' option on
the Configure Database Manager screen.
Ports This panel allows you to view and configure Ports which the Cloud Service will use
for accessing Models.
Integration Only available when using the Pro Cloud Server. This panel allows you to
configure Cloud Models to use Integration Plugins.
Server Properties The properties on the right hand side specify the details of the connected Cloud
Service.
Main Properties
Server name - the server name hosting the currently connected Cloud Service ·
Configuration port - the port the Cloud Client is using for communication with ·
the Cloud Service
Protocol version - an internal version number that identifies the message ·
version level the current Cloud service supports
Edition - the edition of the Cloud Service ·
Expiry - the expiry date for the current license ·
The Edition and Expiry apply to Pro Cloud licenses. If no license has been added,
or the license is invalid, or it has expired, then the Edition will display 'Free' and the
Expiry 'Never'
Extended Properties Click on this button to display the screen that shows all extended properties for the
connected Cloud Server. A number of these extended properties can also be
modified.
Licensing Only available when using a Pro Cloud Client. This button allows you to enter the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 105 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
license for the Pro Cloud Server.
Edit Click on this button to display the dialog on which you change the settings for the
currently selected database.
Remove Click on this button to permanently delete the selected database from the Cloud
Server.
Refresh Click on this button to reload the contents of the 'Database Managers' list.
Add Click on this button to display the dialog on which you define a new database.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 106 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Services Logon Screen
The Cloud Services Logon screen is the first to be shown when launching the Management Client, and at a minimum
requires the address and port of the Cloud Server to connect to.
Cloud Services Logon
Option Description
Server Address The Server Address format is:
    <ServerURI>:<Port>
The server URI can be ‘localhost’, an IP address, a DNS name or a machine name;
for example, MyWebServer. If you are working on the web server, 'localhost' will
be sufficient.
Password Enter the password you defined in Management Client Connection Settings, in the
Cloud Server Configuration topic. By default this password is blank; you can reset
it to a new value, as described in the Help topic Global Server Options.
OK Click on this button to log in to the Management Client.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 107 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Extended Server Properties
The Extended Server Properties screen displays when you click on the 'Extended Properties' button on the Main screen.
It helps you to configure the global options applied to the Cloud Server. Each of these options can also be set in the
configuration file; however, the service does not require a restart if the options are changed using this screen.
Options
Option Description
Audit Time Period Read-only display showing the number of seconds between audit reports.
Default Max Simultaneous
QueriesProvides a default value for the setting of 'Max Simultaneous Queries' when
defining new database managers.
Logging File Count Read-only display showing the number of log files that should be retained. All
logging is written to files named 'SparxCloudServicesLog-X.log' where X
represents the file number.
File 'SparxCloudServicesLog-1.log' is always the current file. When the maximum
file size is reached, all existing files are renamed by incrementing the file number
and a new 'SparxCloudServicesLog-1.log' created.
Logging File Size Read-only display showing the maximum file size of each log file. When the file
reaches this maximum, a new file is created.
Log Level Click on the drop-down arrow and select the level of information to be written to
the log file. The valid options are:
 OFF - No logging is performed
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 108 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
 FATAL - Only fatal errors are logged
 WARNING - Warning are logged
 INFO - Information messages that provide general message advising what actions
are occurring
 SYSTEM - More detailed messages
Log Levels are cumulative, therefore each level includes its own level messages as
well of those that are considered 'higher' levels. For example the INFO level
includes all messages of type FATAL, WARNING and INFO
Logging Directory Read-only display showing the physical directory into which the log files are saved.
License Store Displayed when using the Pro Cloud Server. Displays the path of the license store
file, by default this is C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud
Services\Service\sskeys.dat
Temp Directory Read-only display showing the physical path of the temp directory, by default this
is C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Service\Temp.
Set New Password Select this checkbox to set/change the administrator password for the currently
connected Cloud Server. If a Password is set then all users attempting to use the
Cloud Configuration Client will be required to provide the specified password.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 109 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
License Screen
The 'License' screen displays whenever you click on the Licensing button on the Main screen. It allows the user to
quickly and easily see what Pro Cloud Server licenses have been defined, and the complete details of each license.
Note: The 'License' screen is only available in the Pro Cloud Server and Pro Cloud Server Express builds of the Sparx
Systems Cloud Server.
On a new installation, when the 'License' screen is first shown it should look resemble this:
However, over time as your Pro Cloud Licenses expire you will be able to see a complete history of all licenses:
If there are multiple licenses defined, the Pro Cloud Server will determine the 'best' one, or the one with the latest expiry
date when licenses are for the same Product. Any license shown with 'True' in the 'Active' column is a license currently
being used. In the example, none of the licenses are shown as 'Active' since they have all expired.
Add a new License
Click on the Add.. button and you will be prompted for the complete license key (including the { and }),
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 110 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Enter the License key provided and click OK. If the entered value is a valid Pro Cloud Server license for the current
edition then the License is added to the list of allocated licenses.
Note: After adding a License to the Pro Cloud Server the Cloud Service should be manually restarted in order for all
components to detect the change in license details and potentially start additional components enabled by the new
license.
Remove a License
At any time it is possible to remove an existing license simply by selecting the license in the list and pressing the
Remove button. The list of allocated licenses will be refreshed accordingly.
Note: After removing a License from the Pro Cloud Server the Cloud Service should be manually restarted in order for
all components to detect the change in license details and potentially start/stop components enabled or disabled by the
removal of the license.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 111 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Database Manager
The Add Database Manager screen displays when you click on the Add button on the 'Sparx Systems Cloud Services
Configuration Client' dialog; it helps you to define a new database connection to either a local Firebird repository or a
DBMS repository (via ODBC or OLE/DB).
This note is shown on the Add Database Manager screen:
'Note: The Data Source Names and network paths provided by the Data Link Properties and ODBC Data Sources dialogs
are relative to this machine and may need to be modified to match those on the server.'
This means if the Cloud Services Client application is running from a remote machine (that is, not the machine running
the Cloud Server) the screens that are shown by clicking on the 
  button and ODBC Data Sources button are relative
to the current machine and not the Cloud Server machine, so care should be taken.
By default and as a safety precaution, whenever a new Database is defined it is automatically configured to be disabled.
You can enable the database during definition by selecting the 'Enabled' checkbox on the Configure Database Manager
screen.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 112 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Adding New Databases
It is important to note that the Cloud Server uniquely identifies Databases by a single identifying value; this value is
referred to as the database 'Alias'.
When adding a new database manager, the Alias can be specified using the 'Alias' field on the 'Add Database Manager'
dialog.
If no Alias is specified, then a default Alias is determined. For:
Firebird definitions, the 'Alias' is the filename minus the extension ·
ODBC based definitions, the 'Alias' is the 'Data Source' ·
Oracle OLE DB based definitions, the 'Alias' is the 'net service name' ·
SQLServer OLE DB based definitions, the 'Alias' is the 'Initial Catalog' ·
Therefore, take care when defining database connections, to ensure that you do not create duplicate database aliases.
However, if two or more database definitions do share the same alias then all Enterprise Architect clients will connect to
the first database found with the requested alias.
Item Description
Firebird Database Sparx Systems, in the 'Introduction to Sparx Systems Cloud Services' webinar,
demonstrate the Cloud Services with a Firebird database as it is so easy to set up
and use, and it works extremely well with Sparx Systems Cloud service technology.
Firebird is a free, open source rational database that runs on a variety of platforms.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 113 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Firebird is very sophisticated and offers great concurrency, scalability and
performance. It can be used in an enterprise setting and has been used in production
systems, under a variety of names, since 1981.
To discover more about the Firebird database, please visit this website:
    http://www.firebirdsql.org/en/about-firebird/
You can view the webinar by clicking on this link:
https://sparxsystems.com/resources/webinar/model-repository/cloud/introduction/in
troduction-cloud-services.html
You can define a connection to a Firebird database by entering its filename (and
extension) only; for example,'MyFireBird.feap'.
The Cloud Server assumes all Firebird databases physically reside under the
directory %SERVICE_PATH%\Models\. The Cloud Server is, by default, installed
to the folder of:
    ...\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\
In this case all Firebird models will be located at:
    ...\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Models\
ODBC Database You can define a connection to a database under a DBMS such as MySQL or
PostgreSQL, by specifying the connection string to the database. If you are running
the Management Client on the same machine as the server you can:
Click on the 
  button to open the 'Data Link Properties' dialog to build the 1.
connection string.
Select the provider 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers' and click 2.
on the Next >> button.
Select the pre-defined System DSN from the 'Use data source name' field. 3.
Fill in the user name and password and select the 'Allow saving password' 4.
checkbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 114 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes:
Define all ODBC DSNs as SYSTEM DSNs, because the Cloud Server runs as ·
a Windows Service and User DSNs might not be available to the Cloud Server
The step for filling in the user name and password might not be required if the ·
user name and password have been saved with the ODBC DSN
The ODBC Data Sources button displays the Windows 'ODBC Data Source ·
Administrator' dialog, which you can use to set up a new ODBC system data
source to be listed on the 'Data Link Properties' dialog (if you are running the
administration client on the same machine as the server); it is particularly
helpful because it shows the 32-bit ODBC data source list that matches
Enterprise Architect and the Cloud Services
Oracle Database (via OLE
DB)You can define a connection to an Oracle Database (via OLE/DB) by specifying the
connection string to the database. If you are running the Management Client on the
same machine as the server you can:
Click on the 
  button to open the 'Data Link Properties' dialog to build the 1.
connection string.
Select the provider 'Oracle Provider for OLE DB' and click on the Next >> 2.
button.
Type in the name of the 'Data Source'; this is the Oracle net service name as 3.
defined in the TNSNAMES.ORA.
Fill in the user name and password and select the 'Allow saving password' 4.
checkbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 115 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Note:
The Cloud Server identifies databases by the 'Data Source' value and Oracle ·
OLE DB defines the 'Data Source' as the net service name, so it is only
possible to access one Oracle repository per net service name; the workaround
to this limitation is to define multiple net service names in TNSNAMES.ORA
that differ only by name
SQLServer Database (via
OLE DB using SQL Server
authentication)Microsoft SQL Server supports two different forms of database authentication:
Windows NT authentication, and ·
SQL Server authentication ·
The Cloud Service will work with either, but SQL Server authentication is easier to
configure.
Prior to defining the Cloud Service connection, define a SQL Server user with
db_datareader and db_datawriter roles to the database that will act as the Enterprise
Architect repository.
You can define a connection to a SQLServer Database by specifying the connection
string to the database. If you are running the Management Client on the same
machine as the server you can:
Click on the 
  button to open the 'Data Link Properties' dialog to build the 1.
connection string.
Select 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for SQL Server' or 'Microsoft OLE DB 2.
Driver for SQL Server' and click on the Next >> button.
Select or type in the instance of SQL Server. 3.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 116 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Select the 'Use a specific user name and password' checkbox and fill in the user 4.
name and password, then select the 'Allow saving password' checkbox.
Select the database that is the Enterprise Architect repository in 'Select the 5.
database on the server'.
SQLServer Database (via
OLE DB using Windows
authentication)Microsoft SQL Server supports two different forms of database authentication:
Windows NT authentication and ·
SQL Server authentication ·
The Cloud Service will work with either, but Windows authentication requires
some special consideration. The Cloud Server runs as a Windows Service, and by
default all Windows Services run as 'Local System Account'; therefore, if Windows
authentication is to be used, the Sparx Systems Cloud Service should be configured
to run under a predefined network user (configured with the Windows Services
console) and this network user must have access rights to the database (configured
with Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio or similar).
You can define a connection to a SQLServer Database by specifying the connection
string to the database. If you are running the Management Client on the same
machine as the server you can:
Click on the 
  button to open the 'Data Link Properties' dialog to build the 1.
connection string.
Select the provider 'Microsoft OLE DB Provider for SQL Server' or 'Microsoft 2.
OLE DB Driver for SQL Server' and click on the Next >> button.
Select or type in the instance of SQL Server. 3.
Select the 'Use Windows NT Integrated security' checkbox. 4.
Select the database that is the Enterprise Architect repository in 'Select the 5.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 117 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
database on the server'.
Note:
Because the Cloud Service is run under a single account, all database access ·
will be under that account, so it will not be possible to keep track of what
records are updated in the database by individual users
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 118 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Configure Database Manager
The Configure Database Manager screen is shown when you click on the Configure button on the 'Sparx Systems Cloud
Services Configuration Client' dialog. It helps you to modify the various options for the selected Database.
Options
Option Description
Database Manager Read-only display showing the description of the database as shown in the
'Database Manager' List. The format of the description quickly describes the
database, as shown here:
{odbc provider}:{user}@{datasource}
Enabled Select this checkbox to allow the Cloud service to respond to requests for the
connection.
Alias The database Alias. This is the value all Enterprise Architect clients will need to
select in the 'Model Name' field of the 'Cloud Connection' screen. If necessary, you
can edit this Alias to enable users to reference it from Enterprise Architect and
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 119 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA.
Database Type Read-only display showing the DBMS of the database, such as Firebird, MySQL,
Postgres, SQLSvr or Oracle.
Connection String Read-only display showing the connection string used to connect to the database.
Max Simultaneous Queries Type in the maximum number of connections that can be open. You can use the
up/down arrows to adjust this figure to balance resource usage with concurrent user
performance.
There is no explicit limit for this value, but the higher the value the more resources
are consumed on your server, without a matching increase in benefit in user
performance. Connections are held so briefly that the reduction in user wait time
due to more connections being opened is not usually noticeable. If you are reaching
the number of connections you have defined here, increase it by small increments
(units) rather than large ones (tens).
Minimum EA Build Optional. If you want to ensure that all users of the model are on an appropriate
build of Enterprise Architect, type in the lowest build number required.
OSLC Access Code Optional. Type in the access code that all OSLC clients, including WebEA, are
required to send in an HTTP header.
Leave blank to indicate that the OSLC clients are not required to send an access
code.
Require a secure and
authenticated connectionSelect this checkbox to ensure this database is only used by https connections using
http authentication.
Read-only connection Select this checkbox to prevent users from modifying the database referenced by
this connection.
Enable Pro Features
(OSLC, WebEA and
Integration)This option is only available in Pro Cloud Server editions. A checked state indicates
that the current model has 'Pro Features' enabled, which includes OSLC, WebEA
and Integration to external systems.
If this option is disabled then the reason for disabling it will be shown in the text.
For example:
Free Edition - The 'Free' version of the Cloud Server does not support Pro Features
No License - There is no license defined or the license has expired
Not Firebird - The 'Small' edition of the Pro Cloud Server only allows Firebird
models to be configured as Pro-enabled, and the current model is not a Firebird
model
Model Limit Reached - Both the 'Small' and 'Team' editions of the Pro Cloud
Server are limited to a certain number of models that can be Pro-enabled; this
reason code implies the maximum number of models has already been Pro-enabled
Run Scheduled Tasks When this option is checked the Cloud Service will update Time Series charts in the
current model as a schedule task.
Periodically Generate
Diagram Images for
WebEA & ProlaborateThis option is only available in Pro Cloud Server editions and when the given
Database Manager has Pro Features enabled. When this option is checked the Pro
Cloud Server will start the Enterprise Architect Worker process for the current
model, so that all modified Diagram Images and Linked Documents are generated
at a regular interval. Once checked the 'Configure...' button becomes enabled which
when clicked opens the 'Configure Worker' screen. This screen allows you to define
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 120 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
the interval (in seconds) the EAWorker will wait inbetween generation 'runs'.
OK Click on this button to save the settings and close the dialog.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 121 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Port Configuration
When setting up the Cloud Service you will need to define at least one Port which will be used for communication
between the Cloud Service and Enterprise Architect when accessing a Cloud Model.
Ports can be configured via the Ports tab in the Cloud Configuration client.
The Ports Tab
The 'Ports' tab provides information and a number of options:
Item Description
Port List The main area of the Ports tab provides a list of the existing Port definitions.
These Port settings are also covered in more detail in the Add a Port Definition
topic.
Columns
Port - The Port Number
Require SSL - When True, models can only be accessed on this port via the HTTPS
protocol
OSLC Supported - Displays True if OSLC support is enabled for this port. OSLC
Support is required for WebEA access.
Default Model - If the port is configured to open a specific default model, it's name
is displayed
Authentication - Indicates what type of Authentication is required (if any).
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 122 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Resource Monitor Located in the lower left of the Ports Tab, this button can be used to open the
Windows Resource Monitor. This allows you to check which Ports are already in
use before adding a new Port Definition.
Please note: this will open the Windows Resource Monitor for the current machine,
which is only relevant if the Configuration Client is running on the machine hosting
the Cloud Server.
Add Click on this button to add a new Port Definition.
Edit Click on this button to edit the configuration of the selected Port. Editing a Port
provides the same options as when adding a new one, however the Port number
cannot be changed.
Remove Click on this button to permanently delete the selected Port Configuration
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 123 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add a Port Definition
As mentioned in the Port Configuration topic, when setting up the Cloud Server you will need to define at least one Port
for communication between the Cloud Service and Enterprise Architect.
To add a new Port Definition:
1) Open the Cloud Services Configuration Client.
2) Select the Ports tab.
3) Click on the Add button.
4) The Add TCP Port dialog will be display. Referring to the table below, enter the Port details, then Click OK.
5) Confirm that your Firewall Settings are correct.
6) Restart the Cloud Service so that the changes take effect.
Add TCP Port
Field Description
Server Port Enter the Port number to be used for Cloud Connections.
Each defined Port must be unique and not used by any other service or application
on the current machine. The standard HTTP Port (80) and HTTPS Port (443) are no
different; if they are available, the Cloud Service can be configured to use them.
You can use the Windows Resource Monitor (which is accessibly via an icon on the
Configuration Client 'Ports' tab) to check which Ports are already in use.
Firewall Note: When changing or adding a new Port, check that incoming requests
are allowed by the firewall settings at both the local machine and network levels.
Wine Note: When the service is running on Wine you should not use privileged
Ports - those below 1024; under Wine, most applications are only able to listen on
ports above 1024.
Requires SSL Enabling this option will require all connections on this port to use the HTTPS
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 124 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
protocol.
When you enable this option, a file named server.pem, must also exist in the same
directory as the configuration file, and it must contain a valid private key /
certificate. For more details on server.pem see the SSL Certificates section.
OSLC Supported Enable this option to allow OSLC access to Models.
Note, WebEA makes use of OSLC. If you intend to access Models via WebEA then
this option should be enabled.
Default Model Optionally, enter the name of a default model which will be used by OSLC.
Typically OSLC URL's include the model name. If a default model has been
specified then the model name can be omitted from the URL.
Authentication Select the type of authentication that will be required for this Port:
Model - All model connections that use the current port will be forced to request
HTTP authorization using the user security defined in the Enterprise Architect
model being connected to. Passwords must be explicitly and individually assigned
in that model using the Maintain Users procedure; the default administrator
password and any passwords imported from Windows Active Directory do not
work. Note that if you are not using SSL to connect, the usernames and passwords
will be sent in plain text.
If the model does not have security enabled, the Cloud user is not prompted for a
password.
Global - Selecting this option displays an additional Global Model field. In this
field enter the name of a model which will be used to provide the security profile to
all connections opened with the current port. This is helpful if you want to provide
multiple models but only manage one list of users. Passwords must be explicitly
and individually assigned in the reference model using the Maintain Users
procedure; the default administrator password and any passwords imported from
Windows Active Directory do not work.
SSL Certificates
In order for the Cloud Service's internal Web Server to start a port using SSL, two individual files, cacert.pem and
server.pem are required in the same folder as the Cloud Services configuration file.
cacert.pem - contains a collection of trusted certificates (in .X509 format); that is, CA certificates ·
server.pem - contains a certificate and private key (in .X509 format) for your server ·
Sparx Systems do not supply a server.pem, because typically SSL certificates have to include the current server's details
as well as individual details about your organization. Although this is an additional step, it is a particularly good idea to
apply it if you are providing access to external users. Creating and signing a SSL certificate for your Cloud Server should
be performed using an appropriate certificate authority (CA).
However, to help with initial setup and testing purposes, or for setups that are entirely within a closed network, you can
generate your own self-signed certificate.
In general, self-signed certificates are not trusted by major browsers or operating systems and will generate errors or
warnings visible to end users. See the Self-Signed SSL Certificates section on how to create a self-signed certificate.
To add trust to a self-signed certificate when it is not practical to generate globally trusted certificates, see Add Trust 
with a Certificate Authority (CA).
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 125 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Note: If the Cloud Service is started without a valid server.pem file and a port is defined with REQUIRE_SSL=1 then the
internal web server will not be able to open the port. If this situation occurs, error messages to this effect will be written
to the .LOG file.
Advanced Port Configuration
Optionally, Ports can also be configured by directly editing the Cloud Server's configuration file
(SSCloudServices.config). This allows some additional settings which are not available in the Cloud Configuration
Client.
The definition of a Port is denoted in the configuration file, with open and close parentheses, each on their own lines
without any leading whitespace. Inside the parentheses contain a number of supporting options that control and limit how
the port can be used. All options except SERVER_PORT are optional.
    (
    SERVER_PORT=804
    REQUIRE_SSL=0
    OSLC_SUPPORT=1
    DEFAULT_MODEL=
    MODEL_AUTHENTICATION=
    GLOBAL_AUTHENTICATION=user model
    EA_MINIMUM_BUILD=
    EA_MAXIMUM_BUILD=
    )
Settings Explained
Setting Description
SERVER_PORT This option expects a numeric value (whole number) that defines a Port number;
there is no default value.
For example, SERVER_PORT=804 states that the Cloud Service will listen to
HTTP connections on port 804. Each defined port must be unique and not used by
any other service or application on the current machine. The standard HTTP port
(80) and HTTPS port (443) are no different, if they are available the Cloud Service
can be configured to use them.
Firewall Note: When changing or adding a new port, check that incoming requests
are allowed by the firewall settings at both the local machine and network levels.
Wine Note: When the service is running on Wine you should not use privileged
ports - those below 1024. Under Wine, most applications are only able to listen on
ports above 1024.
REQUIRE_SSL This option expects either a value of 0 or 1; the default is 0.
A value of 1 will enforce the use of SSL on the current port; that is, all connections
must be performed using HTTPS, which is useful when connections need to be
exposed on public networks.
In order for the Cloud Service to be able to successfully configure ports as
REQUIRE_SSL=1, a file called server.pem must exist in the same directory as the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 126 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
configuration file, and contain a valid private key / certificate. For more details on
server.pem see the SSL Certificates section.
OSLC_SUPPORT This option expects either a value of 0 or 1, the default is 1.
A value of 1 defines that connections that use the current port will be able to
perform queries using the 'Open Services for Lifecycle Collaboration' standard.
This is discussed further in the OSLC Requirements Management topic.
DEFAULT_MODEL This option expects the alias of a defined database manager, or blank, the default is
blank.
By defining a value for this option allows a single model to be exposed on a port,
making it possible to use a different port for each model. Model names are
discussed further in the Connecting Enterprise Architect to a Cloud Server topic.
MODEL_AUTHENTICAT
IONThis option expects either a value of 0 or 1, the default is 0.
By defining this option as 1, all model connections that use the current port will be
forced to request HTTP authorization using the user security defined in the
Enterprise Architect model being connected to. Passwords must be explicitly and
individually assigned in that model using the Maintain Users procedure; the default
administrator password and any passwords imported from Windows Active
Directory do not work. Note that if you are not using SSL to connect, the usernames
and passwords will be sent in plain text.
If the model does not have security enabled, the Cloud user is not prompted for a
password.
This option is mutually exclusive with GLOBAL_AUTHENTICATION.
GLOBAL_AUTHENTICA
TIONThis option expects the alias of a defined database manager, or blank, the default is
blank.
By defining this option a single Enterprise Architect model with security enabled
can be used to provide the security profile to all connections opened with the
current port. This is helpful if you want to provide multiple models but only
manage one list of users. Passwords must be explicitly and individually assigned in
the reference model using the Maintain Users procedure; the default administrator
password and any passwords imported from Windows Active Directory do not
work.
This option is mutually exclusive with MODEL_AUTHENTICATION.
EA_MINIMUM_BUILD This option expects a numeric value that represents the minimum Enterprise
Architect version that can connect to models using this port. The default is
undefined which implies all versions are allowed.
EA_MAXIMUM_BUILD This option expects a numeric value that represents the maximum Enterprise
Architect version that can connect to models using this port. The default is
undefined which implies all versions are allowed.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 127 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Advanced SSL
In general, self-signed certificates are not trusted by major browsers or operating systems and will generate errors or
warnings visible to end users. See the Self-Signed SSL Certificates section on how to create a self-signed certificate.
To add trust to a self-signed certificate when it is not practical to generate globally trusted certificates, see Add Trust 
with a Certificate Authority (CA).
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 128 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Trust with a Certificate Authority (CA)
In general, it is preferable to use a certificate that has been signed by a globally trusted root Certificate Authority (CA).
There are many CAs that are trusted by all major browser and operating systems that can be used to sign certificates for
use with a https server.
If the system architecture makes using a globally trusted CA impractical then it is still possible to have client browsers
and operating systems set up to trust a self-signed certificate and avoid security errors or showing warnings to end users.
One way is to simply add the certificate to the trust store of the client browser or operating system, however this would
need to be done for each certificate generated. A better approach is to create your own root Certificate Authority and use
that to sign each server certificate.
To do this, a self-signed SSL certificate needs to be signed with your own Certificate Authority (CA) certificate and key.
And the clients (browsers, operating systems) need to be told to trust the CA certificate. The instructions for adding a CA
to a client vary by operating system or browser used.
Create a Certificate Authority
There are many ways to create CA certificates, however, the OpenSSL toolkit is one of the easiest and most
comprehensive. As the name suggests, OpenSSL is an open source toolkit for SSL/TLS; see the official website for
details. You will need to download and install the OpenSSL product that suits your environment.
To create a CA there are two steps:
Generate new key and certificate request. 1.
Self-sign the request to generate a CA certificate. 2.
1. Generate new key and certificate request
This can be done in multiple steps, or generated from an existing key file, but for simplicity a new key and new request
can be generated in one command. The example below shows how to create a request for a company named 'My
Company'. Change this to something more appropriate for your organisation:
openssl req -new -sha256 -nodes -newkey rsa:4096 -subj '/O=My Company/CN=My Company Internal CA' -keyout ·
MyCompanyCA.key -out MyCompanyCA.csr
2. Self-sign the request to generate a CA certificate
This step self-signs the CA certificate request, and makes the CA valid for 1 year (-days 365). Change 'MyCompany' to
match the key and csr request generated in the previous step:
openssl x509 -req -sha256 -in MyCompanyCA.csr -signkey MyCompanyCA.key -days 365 -out MyCompanyCA.crt ·
Create a server certificate and use the CA to sign it
Now that the MyCompanyCA.crt is generated, it can be used to sign your own certificates for a cloud server or WebEA.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 129 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
First, similarly to Self-Signed SSL Certificates, create a new certificate request. The following example creates a new
key and certificate request for a server named 'cloud.mycompany.com':
openssl req -new -nodes -newkey rsa:4096 -subj '/CN=cloud.mycompany.com' -keyout cloud.mycompany.com.key ·
-out cloud.mycompany.com.csr
Sign the new certificate request with the CA:
openssl x509 -req -CA MyCompanyCA.crt -CAkey MyCompanyCA.key -CAcreateserial -sha256 -days 365 -in ·
cloud.mycompany.com.csr -out cloud.mycompany.com.crt
The final step for use with a Pro Cloud Server is to concatenate the key and certificate into a 'server.pem' file:
Windows: copy /b cloud.mycompany.com.crt+cloud.mycompany.com.key server.pem ·
Linux: cat cloud.mycompany.com.crt cloud.mycompany.com.key > server.pem ·
Allow clients to trust the root CA
The client operating system or browser now needs to have the CA certificate added to its list of trusted CAs. The
instructions vary by operating system and browser but instructions for a few major clients are listed below. For all these
steps the 'certificate' referred to is the 'MyCompanyCA.crt' generated in Step 2 above:
Client (Operating System,
Browser)Instructions
Microsoft Windows Right click the CA certificate file and select 'Install Certificate'. Follow the prompts
to add the certificate to the trust store either for the current user only or all users of
the computer.
Linux - Ubuntu Copy CA cetificate to /usr/local/share/ca-certificates
eg:
sudo cp ~/MyCompanyCA.crt /usr/local/share/ca-certificates/ ·
Update certificates with the following command:
sudo update-ca-certificates ·
The output should show something similar to 'Adding
debian:~/MyCompanyCA.pem'.
If using Wine then close all Wine programs and restart Wine:
wineserver -k ·
See Ubuntu Help for more information.
Firefox Firefox does not use the operating systems trust store so the CA needs to be added
manually.
If the certificate has a '.pem' extension, then the simplest way is to drag-and-drop
the CA certificate file onto Firefox and a prompt will ask to trust the certificate.
Otherwise, manually add certificates and manage added certificates through
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 130 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Firefox's Privacy & Security preferences.
More information can be found on the Firefox wiki
Chrome/Chromium Chrome & Chromium do not use the operating system trust store so the CA needs
to be added manually.
Open Settings > Advanced > Manage Certificates > Authorities, and select Import.
Internet Explorer Internet Explorer uses the Windows trust store so adding the certificate to Windows
(see above) is sufficient to add trust to the browser as well.
WebEA WebEA uses php to communicate with a Pro Cloud model. If the connection
between php and the Pro Cloud uses https, then the CA can be added to php's
configuration to allow it to trust the certificate.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 131 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Self-Signed SSL Certificates
Create a certificate
There are many ways to create SSL certificates; however, we have found the OpenSSL toolkit to be the easiest and most
comprehensive. As the name suggests, OpenSSL is an open source toolkit for SSL/TLS; see the official website for
details.
You will need to download and install the OpenSSL product that suits your environment. For the purpose of this
document OpenSSL was installed into C:\OpenSSL-Win64. If your OpenSSL is installed into a different directory then
these steps will have to be adjusted to suit.
Create a new command/batch file in C:\OpenSSL-Win64\bin\ ·
Open this file and paste these details into it ·
     set SRVNAME=localhost
     openssl genrsa -out %SRVNAME%.key 2048
     openssl req -new -x509 -key %SRVNAME%.key -out %SRVNAME%.cert -days 3650 -subj /CN=%SRVNAME%
     copy /b %SRVNAME%.cert+%SRVNAME%.key server.pem
Change the value 'localhost' in the first line to suit your server's name and save the file ·
Run the batch file ·
Move the generated 'server.pem' file to the Cloud Service's 'Service' folder (that is, C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx ·
Systems\Cloud Services\Service\)
In the statements, the 'openssl genrsa' command will use OpenSSL to generate a new SSL private key, and save it to
'localhost.key'.
The 'openssl req' command will generate a .X509 self-signed certificate using the key generated, specifying 'localhost' as
the common name (CN), setting the expiry to be 10 years from the current date and saving the certificate as
'localhost.cert'.
The final command simply copies the contents of the certificate and key files into the new file 'server.pem'.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 132 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Firewall Settings
When setting up a server, you must check that the Firewall on the server is set to allow the incoming ports for the
database connections that you have created.
For example, in the default SSCloudServices.config configuration file the ports 804 and 805 and are set as operative. If
you have a firewall you must set these ports as enabled for inbound traffic.
For information on creating the Inbound Rule to identify the ports you have specified in the config file (the 'Sparx
Systems Cloud Services' rule in the illustration), see the Microsoft Windows online topic Create an Inbound Port Rule.
Note: A common cause of failure is that other services or programs are already using the allocated ports. This is
especially likely when using the default http (80) and https (443) ports. Check that no other services are using the
allocated ports.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 133 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Using Multiple Configurations
Using Multiple Configurations
The Sparx Systems Cloud Service can be run multiple times with different configurations by passing these additional
arguments.
Argument Description
--config / -c The argument following this will be interpreted as the path to the configuration file
to read on startup. This allows a secondary instance of the Cloud server to run on a
different set of ports, use an altered logging level or different directories.
When multiple configurations are being used, you need to ensure that each instance
reads a configuration file that specifies different paths. Otherwise only the first
instance will start successfully.
By default this references SSCloudServices.config in the directory containing the
service executable.
--path / -p The argument following this will be interpreted as the absolute path to search for
other resources. Changing this parameter changes where the configuration file is
read from, along with all paths in the configuration file that specify
%SERVICE_PATH%. Setting this to a directory other than the default is an easy
way to separate multiple running instances of the Cloud service.
--registry / -r The argument following this will be interpreted as a registry path within
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE where the models the Cloud server provides are
specified. Changing this parameter allows using different Cloud servers to provide
access to different models.
By default this is Software\Sparx Systems\SQLBridge.
standalone This argument allows starting the SSCloudServices.exe as a standalone executable
instead of requiring it to be launched as a Windows service.
This can be important if Windows firewall is blocking the service, as it will prompt
to create a firewall exception.
Additionally, Wine by default closes services automatically when the last user
process closes, but using the 'standalone' argument to run the server as an
application will ensure that the service isn't terminated when no more user
applications are running. Use the command line:
    wine SSCloudServices.exe standalone
Or, if you are launching from a terminal and want to close it:
    wine SSCloudServices.exe standalone & disown    or
    nohup wine SSCloudServices.exe standalone
(The 'disown' parameter and 'nohup' command both close the terminal but ignore
the 'hangup' message that would otherwise disconnect Cloud Services again.)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 134 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Service using IIS (Optional)
For most users, the built-in web server provided with the Cloud Service provides all the functionality they require. It is
also the easiest method to set up and use.
However, the Cloud Service also provides the option of integrating with Internet Information Services (IIS). This is
recommended only for users for whom the built-in authentication methods are insufficient, and who want to use
Windows Active Directory or certificate-based authentication (see the Import User IDs from Active Directory Help
topic). Note that the use of IIS does not eliminate the login process, and users must still enter their user IDs and
passwords.
To configure IIS to host the Cloud Service, you must first set the SparxCloudLink.sseap file to refer to the Cloud
Service, and then in Windows open the Internet Information Services (IIS) Manager and configure it to send requests to
the appropriate module. Depending on your preferences you can choose either an HTTP Module or an ISAPI module.
Prior to setting up HTTP or ISAPI, these settings must be made in IIS:
Application Pool settings ·
Feature Settings ·
For a secure HTTPS setup (optional):
Set up a Certificate ·
Set up HTTPS ·
Configuration Settings
Before setting up your HTTP module or ISAPI module, you must first check that the sscloudservices.config file for the
service is configured as required, and note the port used so that you can specify it when you go on to set the
SparxCloudLink.sseap file to refer to the Cloud Service.
The directory path containing the ISAPI dll also contains the SparxCloudLink.sseap configuration file.
The path should resemble this example:
    “C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\ISAPI”
Edit this file in a text editor, running as an Administrator.
The default contents are:
   [cloud]
   server=localhost
   port=803
server:
The address to look up the machine running the Cloud Service. In most circumstances it is best to run the HTTP module
and the Cloud Service on the same machine. In this case, the default value of localhost can be used. If the Cloud Service
is running on a different machine, use the IP address or server name where the service is running.
port:
The port the Cloud Service is listening on for admin requests. By default this takes the value of 803, but this should be
cross-referenced against your service configuration in the sscloudservices.config file.
Optional settings
These points are optional. For testing purposes you might prefer to leave these changes until any issues with IIS are
resolved.
In the SSCloudServices.config file, remove all the references to ports other than the administration port (default 1.
803). In other words, remove the bracketed entries (…) from the config file.
Save the SSCloudService.config file. 2.
Restart the Service. 3.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 135 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Application Pool Settings
HTTP or ISAPI will require an Application pool that is 32-bit and not managed code. This illustration shows the settings
for 32-bit applications in the IIS Application Pools Advanced Settings view.
Feature Permissions
This illustration shows the access path and the 'Default Web Site | Handler' mappings to permit Script Execution.
Setting up a Certificate
In order to run the HTTPS service you must set up a security certificate in IIS.
In the IIS Manager:
Under 'Connections', select the root connection (machine name). 1.
Double-click on the 'Server Certificates' icon. 2.
Click on 'Create Self Signed Certificate'. 3.
Specify a simple, user-friendly name for the certificate. 4.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 136 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Setting up HTTPS
To set the bindings through which HTTPS will operate, you must include a port and a certificate in the site bindings.
In the IIS Manager:
Under 'Connections', select the 'Default Web Site' option ·
Under 'Actions' click on the 'Bindings' option ·
In the Site Bindings window click on 'Add' ·
This will open the Add Site Binding window.
Set these parameters:
Type: HTTPS ·
Port: 443 ·
SSL Certificate: select the certificate created in Setting up a Certificate ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 137 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
HTTP Module
To set up the HTTP module in the Internet Information Services (IIS) Manager:
In the 'Connections' panel, select the machine properties (top of the tree). 1.
Double-click on the 'Modules' icon in the middle panel. 2.
This returns the 'Modules' list and the 'Actions' view.
In the 'Actions' list, click on the 'Configure Native Modules…' option. 3.
This opens the 'Configure Native Modules' view.
Click on the Register button to open the 'Register Native Module' dialog. 4.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 138 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Type in the name and the path of the SSCSIISHttpLink.dll file.
Click on the OK button. The 'SSCloudServices' checkbox will now be selected. 5.
Click on the OK button to close the 'Configure Native Modules' dialog. 6.
In the 'Connections' panel (see Step 1), click on your web site. 7.
Double-click on the 'Handler Mappings' in the middle pane. 8.
This opens the Handler Mappings view:
In the 'Actions' list, click on the 'Add Module Mapping' option to open the 'Add Module Mapping' dialog. 9.
As illustrated, set the 'Request path' and 'Name'. 10.
In the 'Module' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select the module added in step 4. 11.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 139 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Click on the Request Restrictions button. On the 'Request Restrictions' dialog, select the 'Access' tab. Select the 12.
'Execute' radio button to enable Execute permission.
Select the 'Mappings' tab and deselect the 'Invoke Handler only if request is mapped to' checkbox. 13.
Click on the OK button. 14.
Close the 'Add Module Mapping' dialog by clicking on the OK button again. 15.
To complete this HTTP module set up, see the Configuration Settings section at the start of this topic. You should then
be able to connect to a model using Enterprise Architect via your IIS server using the HTTP module.
ISAPI Module
To configure an ISAPI module instead of the HTTP module:
In the 'Connections' panel, select the machine properties: 1.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 140 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Double-click on the 'Handler Mappings' icon: 2.
In the 'Actions' list, click on the 'Add Module Mapping' option. 3.
In the 'Add Module Mapping' dialog, set 'Request path' to 'sparxCloudLink.sseap', 'Module' to 'IsapiModule', and 4.
'Executable' to 'SSCSIISIsapiLink.dll', as shown.
Click on the OK button to close the dialog. You should now be able to connect to a model using Enterprise Architect 5.
via your IIS server using ISAPI.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 141 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 142 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connecting Enterprise Architect to a Cloud Service
Once your Cloud Service has been set up with at least one port listening for communication and at least one model you
can connect to, you can connect to the model in Enterprise Architect. When you first open Enterprise Architect, the
'Manage Projects' dialog displays. The Connect to Cloud button on the top right provides access to Cloud connections.
In later work sessions you can access this dialog and button by selecting the 'New > Manage projects' option on the Start
Page. However, there is also a Cloud Connection link on the 'Start Page' itself.
Cloud Connection Dialog
The 'Cloud Connection' dialog prompts you for the details of the model.
Option Action
Name Type the name to use to refer to this model. It does not have to match any values on
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 143 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
the server, and will appear in your recent models list.
Protocol Click on the drop-down arrow and select a secure (https) or insecure (http)
connection, as supported by the server you are connecting to. When you select the
protocol, the port will be automatically set to match the default for that protocol.
Server Type in the machine name (sparxcloud.com) or IP address (192.168.0.20) of your
server.
Port Define the port number the service is listening on. This should match the settings in
the configuration file on the server.
Note: For a server, the default settings will use port 804 for http and port 805 for
https.
Model Name Type in the name of the model available on the server.
Note: Generally a system administrator will provide you with a list of available
models. However, for those with permission to use the Management Client the
model name to access the given database can be found in the read-only 'Alias' field
on the Configure Database Manager screen in the Cloud Services Configuration
Client application.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 144 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Pro Cloud Server
Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server is an enhanced, separately purchased and separately licensed edition of Sparx Systems
Cloud Services. Once the Cloud Service has been installed and configured, it runs on the installed machine as a Windows
service, listening for requests for data from Enterprise Architect.
In order to support the new Pro Cloud Server functionality, the service has these enhancements:
The ability to define individual database managers as 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)' ·
The main screen of the Configuration Client displays the Pro Cloud Server's edition, the date it expires and' if ·
appropriate, the number of WebEA users licensed (Express edition only)
The ability to define a 'Default Schema' option against individual database managers ·
As well as providing all the features and benefits of Sparx Systems Cloud Services, the Pro Cloud Server also includes:
The Sparx Systems Floating License Server ·
Integration Plugins ·
WebEA, a web based application that allows users to view and discuss elements in Enterprise Architect models ·
through a web browser, while on portable devices or remote desk-top systems
Visibility Levels for Oracle and SQL Server 2016 based models, so that it is possible to restrict the access of a user ·
or group of users to parts of the model that are only relevant to them
Prolaborate, a team Sharing and Collaboration Software package ·
Sparx Systems Pro Cloud is available in three premium editions, to support small, medium and large projects with
differing numbers of models; the editions have the same installer but the License key determines what functionality is
enabled:
Small Business, which supports up to three Firebird repositories; Visibility Levels is not available in this edition, as ·
the feature is for Oracle and SQL Server databases
Team Server, which supports up to five repositories of any type ·
Enterprise Server, which supports any number of repositories of any type, within any restrictions imposed by your ·
server and network
Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Express Edition provides WebEA access for a limited number of concurrent users, based on
the number of licenses.
Installation
The Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server product is installed using a standard Windows Installer package. While it is
possible to change the install location of the Pro Cloud Server, most users elect to keep the default of C:\Program Files
(x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\ (assuming a 64bit machine is being used).
The Pro Cloud Server installer consists of multiple optional components; all but the 'IIS Integration' is installed by
default. The installation supports any number and combination of components being installed; for example, it would be
possible to run the installer and choose to only install the 'Management Client', which would useful to users that require
the ability to configure the Pro Cloud Server from their desktops.  By default each component is installed into a
sub-folder immediately under the installation folder; however, some of the components allow their folder to be installed
to a different location.
The Pro Cloud Server installation consists of these components:
Pro Cloud Service - installed in Service folder, containing the Windows service and sub-folders for log files, local ·
models and various driver/supports files
Management Client - installed in Client folder, and will contain separate applications to configure the Pro Cloud ·
Service and the Keystore
WebEA - installed in WebEA folder, and will contain the PHP, Javascript and CSS files that make up the WebEA ·
application; typically the entire contents of this folder should be copied to a location that is controlled by your web
server
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 145 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Plugin Interface - installed in the SBPI folder, and will contain various executables to support linking elements ·
within an Enterprise Architect model to external products
Visibility Levels - installed in the VisibilityLevels folder, and will contain the SQL scripts needed to enable (or ·
disable) visibility levels within Oracle or SQL Server 2016+ models
IIS Integration - installed in the ISAPI folder, and will contain the runtime APIs needed by the Cloud Service for ·
IIS integration
To assist you in performing and understanding the installation process, watch the Sparx Systems webinar Installing the
Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server. Click on the link to access this webinar.
WebEA
One of the most requested features from the Enterprise Architect user base recently has been the ability to access
Enterprise Architect models on mobile devices or from desktops without the need to install the Enterprise Architect
application.
Sparx Systems has developed WebEA using PHP, JavaScript and CSS to provide a solution that can be deployed easily,
that runs on the widest variety of systems, and that doesn't require any special hardware or additional licensing.
WebEA has a large array of configuration options that give the Enterprise Architect customer the power to control
exactly how each model can be accessed and what types of actions can be performed.
Plugin Interface
Or Server Based Plugin Interface (SBPI), is a framework developed to extend the Pro Cloud Server via Plugins. In the
initial release of SBPI, the plugins developed will enable the Pro Cloud Server to support the ability to link Enterprise
Architect elements to elements/objects defined in external products and directly view (and potentially update) the details.
Floating License Server
The Sparx Systems Floating License Server functionality has been available for many years as the Key Store, providing
users of Enterprise Architect with the ability to manage their floating licenses. Up until the creation of Pro Cloud Server,
the Key Store was only offered as an independent Windows service. Now that it has been integrated into the Pro Cloud
Server, users only need to install, configure and maintain one service for all their Enterprise Architect needs.
Visibility Levels
The 'Visibility Levels' feature within Enterprise Architect gives model managers the ability to restrict access to certain
sections of a model. Only models hosted by a Pro Cloud Server are able to make use of this feature. Visibility Levels are
implemented by taking advantage of the Row Level Security feature included in Oracle 8+ and Microsoft SQL Server
2016 (onwards).
Row Level Security is a security feature that controls which users can access which rows of data in a database.
Traditional database security only allows for the ability to control which users have access to read, write or delete data
down to the table level. Since Row Level Security functionality is implemented by the database, it is impossible for users
to bypass security implemented at the application level by writing their own scripts or databases queries. That is, the
database ensures that users can only view and update data they are authorized to access.
Since Row Level Security is functionality implemented by the database, most of the changes needed for Enterprise
Architect and the Pro Cloud Server to support it are made directly to the database without needing to change the
application code base, which means there is less to go wrong from an application point of view.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 146 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 147 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Floating License Server
The Sparx Systems Key Store server has been available for many years, providing users of Enterprise Architect with the
ability to manage their floating licenses. Up until version 2.1 of Pro Cloud Server, Floating License functionality was
only offered as an independent Microsoft Windows service. Now that it has been integrated into the Pro Cloud Server,
users only need to install, configure and maintain one Microsoft Windows Service for all their Enterprise Architect
needs.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 148 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Install and Config
The Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server product is installed using a standard Microsoft Windows Installer package that
includes a number of components. The Floating License Server is included in the main 'Pro Cloud Services' component,
and consists of a number of extra files over the standard Sparx Systems Cloud Service.
It is possible to change the install location of the Cloud Service; however this document assumes the default install
location of C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\ (assuming a 64 bit machine is being used).
Important: All communications to the Pro Cloud's Floating License Server are performed via HTTPS, therefore to use
the Pro Cloud Server's Floating License Server functionality at least one Port has to be configured to REQUIRE_SSL=1
and a valid certificate/private key file is defined in the Pro Cloud Server's Services folder. See the Self-Signed Certificate
using OpenSSL section in Port Configuration for more details.
The main Pro Cloud Server's configuration file (SSCloudService.config) defines two settings related to the Floating
License Server, FLOATLIC_PATH and FLOATLIC_CONFIG.
The FLOATLIC_PATH option defines the path and file name of the Key Store file; by default this is:
    %SERVICE_PATH%\sskeys.dat
where "%SERVICE_PATH%" is replaced with the physical path of the 'Services' folder (that is, 'C:\Program Files
(x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Service').
The FLOATLIC_CONFIG option defines the path and file name of the Key Store group file; by default this is:
    %SERVICE_PATH%\ssflsgroup.config
Floating License Server Group Configuration File
The Pro Cloud Server's Floating License Server component installs a configuration file called ssflsgroup.config into the
Service folder (C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Service\ssflsgroup.config). This files defines
'groups' of users that can obtain Licenses from the Floating License Server, and also controls which Enterprise Architect
Product Licenses each group can utilize.
A group is identified by a group name and a set of credentials (user ID and password) which will be used to securely
communicate to the Floating License Server over HTTPS.
The Floating License Server's configuration file will typically consists of multiple group definitions, each group
definition needs to be defined as shown:
GROUP
    Name=human_resources
    UserName={user name}
    Password={password}
    IsManager=false
    ENTITLEMENT
        Product=UltimateSuite
                Academic=false
        Limit=10
    END ENTITLEMENT
    ENTITLEMENT
        :
    END ENTITLEMENT
END GROUP
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 149 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Group Definition Properties
A Group definition begins when the token GROUP is encountered on a new line, and extends until the token END
GROUP is found on a new line.
Property Description
Name The common name of the Floating License group.
UserName Required. Specifies the User ID for the Floating License Group.
Password Required. Specifies the Password for the Floating License Group.
StartDate Optional. Used in combination with the EndDate property to define the date range
that the Group can be used.
EndDate Optional. Used in combination with the StartDate property to define the date range
that the Group can be used.
Entitlement - Section Each Group can define multiple Entitlements. An Entitlement definition begins
when the token ENTITLEMENT is encountered on a new line, and extends until
the token END ENTITLEMENT is found on a new line.
Each Entitlement definition accepts each of these sub-properties:
   Product={Product Code} - The product that this entitlement gives grants access to
this group.
   Academic={true or false} - Determines if this entitlement applies to the academic
edition of the specified Product.
   Limit={number} - Optionally restrict the number of Product keys available to this
group.
The valid Product codes are:
Professional ·
Corporate ·
UnifiedSuite ·
UltimateSuite ·
EclipseIntegration ·
MDGCodeAnalysis ·
MDGDDS ·
MDGDoors ·
MDGLinkEclipse ·
MDGLinkVS ·
MDGRealTime ·
MDGSysML ·
MDGTogaf ·
MDGUPDM ·
MDGZachman ·
RaQuest ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 150 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
TCSEIntegration ·
TCSESuite ·
VSIntegration ·
IsManager Optional. Specifies whether members of this group are permitted to perform
management operations (such as add/remove keys) on the keystore.
Default Value: false
Configuration Changes
Changes to the Pro Cloud Server's Floating License Group file can be made while the Pro Cloud Server is running,
without the need to restart it. The Floating License Server component will detects the last modified time, if the
configuration file has changed since it was last read the entire contents of the file is re-read.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 151 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
User Guide
This topic (the Floating License Server User Guide) mainly describes how to use the Floating License Configuration
Client, a purpose written application which allows environments that use Enterprise Architect to easily manage their
floating licenses.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 152 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Floating License Configuration Client
Administration of License keys that are stored in the Pro Cloud Server's Floating License Server are managed by a
Windows application installed in the Client folder (C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud
Services\Client\SSFloatLicClient.exe).
When the Floating License Configuration Client application is first started it will attempt to open a connection to the
most recent Floating License Server or KeyStore, if this is the first time running the Configuration Client, you will be
automatically prompted for the connection details of a Floating License Server. See Floating License Server Connections
for more details
The Floating License Configuration Client application is capable of performing actions that can be broadly classified into
two different areas. Floating License Server based actions and Key based actions.
The Floating License Configuration Client is capable of connecting and administering multiple Floating License Servers
and Shared KeyStores at any given time. The 'Floating License Servers/ Key Stores' list (in the upper left) will display
each store that the Configuration Client has a connection to.
Floating License Server based Actions
Floating License Server Connections
Set Shared Key Lease Periods
Migrate Shared Keys between Stores
Selecting a connected store from the 'Key Store' list will enable the user to maintain the keys assigned to that store, using
these functions:
Key based Actions
Add Shared Keys
Release Shared Keys
Delete Shared Keys
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 153 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 154 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Floating License Server Connections
The top left corner of the 'Floating License Configuration Client' screen displays a list of connected Floating License
Servers and Shared Keystores. Each entry in the list can be one of three different types of store:
Floating License Server based (prefix: https://) 1.
Shared KeyStore or network based (prefix: ssks://) 2.
File based 3.
The type of store can be determined by the connection's prefix (or lack of it); the network and file based keystore types
are historical, from earlier versions of the Floating License Server.
Floating License Server actions can be performed by selecting a Floating License Server/KeyStore item in the list and
then selecting a menu item from the 'File' menu, or simply right-clicking on an item in the list; the menu options shown
are:
Create...
Selecting the Create... menu option allows for the creation of a new file based keystore.
Link to...
Selecting the Link to... menu option will prompt the user for the connection details of a Floating License Server (or key
store) to be added to the list of connected stores.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 155 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Unlink
Selecting the Unlink menu option while a Floating License Server is selected in the list will release the Floating License
Configuration Client's connection to the store and remove it from the list.
Delete
Selecting the Delete menu option while a file base Key Store is selected in the Key Store list will physical and
permanently delete the file used to store the keys. This option is disabled when the selected Keystore is either a Floating
License Server or shared network KeyStore.
Migrate to...
Selecting the Migrate to... menu option while a file base Key Store is selected in the Floating License Server / Key Store
list will allow the migration of keys from one store to another. This option is disabled when the selected store is either a
Floating License Server or shared network KeyStore based. See Migrate Shared Keys between Stores section for more
details
Options...
Selecting the Options... menu option will display the Options screen for the selected Floating License Server. See Set 
Shared Key Lease Periods section for more details
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 156 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set Shared Key Lease Periods
Normally in an environment that requires licenses to be shared, an Enterprise Architect user 'releases' the license they
have 'leased' immediate upon closing the application. However in an environment where Enterprise Architect users work
offline for periods of time (for example, using laptops) this type of configuration would not allow an offline user to open
Enterprise Architect once they have disconnected from the main network.
For this reason a Floating License Server / Key Store can be configured to have a longer retention period and the 'auto
check on exit' option can be disabled.
To administer the lease period of a Floating License Server / Key Store, select a store from the list and then select the
'Tools | Options' menu option. The 'Keystore Options' dialog is then shown.
(Alternatively, you can right-click on the Floating License Server / Key Store name in the list and select the 'Options...'
context menu item)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 157 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Migrate Shared Keys between Stores
You might want to upgrade from a legacy file or network based Key Store to a new Pro Cloud Server Floating License
Server. This process effectively removes all keys from the original keystore, leaving it empty, and places the keys into
the Floating License Server.
To migrate shared keys from other keystores, you will first need to define a connection to each source keystore, using the
File | Link To menu item. Then making sure the source keystore is selected in the list, select menu item File | Migrate
to...
The 'Migrate Keystore File' screen will be shown:
Click on the [ ... ] button on the right of the Destination field, and browse for the details of the Floating License Server
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 158 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
into which the shared keys are to be transferred. Click on the OK button to migrate the shared keys from the source to the
destination Floating License Server.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 159 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Shared Keys
To add shared keys to a Key Store, select the 'Floating License Server / Key Store' in the list, and then select 'Key |
Add...' from the main menu.
Alternatively, right-click on 'Keys contained in this store' list and select 'Add...'.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 160 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Release Shared Keys
It is usually not necessary to manually release a shared key from a workstation, as this happens automatically if:
The keystore's AutoCheckin option has been enabled and you close all running instances of Enterprise Architect on ·
your workstation
The lease on the key expires. ·
However, if further users want to access Enterprise Architect and there is some technical anomaly that has prevented the
return of a key, you can manually release the key using the Sparx Systems Floating License Configuration Client.
To release a key from its active association with a particular workstation, click on the key in the 'Keys contained in this
store' list, and then select the Key | Release menu item.
(Alternatively, click on the Release Key icon in the toolbar, or right-click on the key and select the Release context menu
option.)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 161 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Delete Shared Keys
To delete a key from the selected Floating License Server / Key Store, open the Floating License Configuration Client,
click on the key in the 'Keys contained in this store' list, and then select the Key | Delete menu option.
(Alternatively, click on the Delete Key icon in the toolbar, or right-click on the key and select the Delete context menu
option.)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 162 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Troubleshooting
If users experience a problem with the Pro Cloud Server's Floating License Server the error message will either be
displayed on the screen for Floating License Configuration Client related errors or written to the Pro Cloud Server's log
file when an error occurs within the Cloud Service. This topic provides a list of common Floating License related errors
that could occur. Each entry describes the situation that has occurred and provides guidance on how to correct the error.
Configuration related Floating License Server errors
Issue Comments
EA Users are not able to
connect to a Floating
License GroupEnterprise Architect users cannot connect to a defined Floating License Group,
even when the entered details exactly match the definition.
Possible reasons:
The Pro Cloud Server configuration file does not contain a valid PCS license ·
key, therefore all Pro Cloud features will be disabled.
If an entitlement in the Floating License Group file is defined with an invalid ·
Enterprise Architect product, the entire Group will be disabled. Check the
Cloud Service's log file for error messages, the invalid product will be
mentioned by name and line number.
The Key Store connection
screen in EA does not
include HTTPS optionIn order for Enterprise Architect to connect to the Pro Cloud Server's Key Store, a
protocol of HTTPS is required for secure communications.
Possible reasons:
A version prior to Enterprise Architect version 14 is in use ·
The Key Store connection
screen in EA cannot
perform a successful 'Test'Your client is not able to communicate with a Pro Cloud Server using the supplied
details.
Possible reasons:
Pro Cloud Service is not installed ·
Pro Cloud Service is not running ·
Pro Cloud Service is not listening on the expected port using HTTPS ·
There is not network connectivity between the client and server ·
A firewall is limiting communications between the client and server ·
Errors while using Floating License Configuration Client
Issue Comments
Could not open keystore at
[FilePath]. The file does
not exist and could not be
createdThe service was unable to open the key store file specified by the
FLOATLIC_PATH property in the Cloud Service configuration file
(SSCloudServices.config).
Ensure that this path exists, and that the user account the Pro Cloud Server
Windows Service is running under has the necessary permissions to read and write
to the specified file.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 163 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The Floating License
Configuration Client is not
able to connectThe machine running the Floating License Configuration Client is not able to
communicate with a Floating License Server using the supplied details.
Possible reasons:
Pro Cloud Service is not installed ·
Pro Cloud Service is not running ·
Pro Cloud Service is not listening on the expected port using HTTPS ·
There is no network connectivity between the client and server ·
A firewall is limiting communications between the client and server ·
The Pro Cloud Server configuration file does not contain a valid PCS license ·
key, therefore all Pro Cloud features are disabled, including the Floating
License Server
The entered user credentials do not match any of the defined Floating License ·
Groups in 'ssflsgroup.config'
The user credentials for the entered Floating License Group have not been ·
defined as 'IsManager=true'
If an entitlement in the Floating License group file is defined with an invalid ·
Enterprise Architect product, the entire Group will be disabled; check the
Cloud Service's log file for error messages - the invalid product will be
mentioned by name and line number
Could not open keystore,
no keystore file specifiedNo file path was specified in the property in the configuration file.
Type a file path into the FLOATLIC_PATH configuration property that the user
account the Pro Cloud Server Windows Service is running under can read and write
to.
Invalid or missing keystore
file - Keystore file cannot
be opened by this version
of the service or the file has
been corruptedThe keystore file specified by the configuration property FLOATLIC_PATH is
either incompatible with the current version of the Floating License Server, or has
somehow been corrupted on the file system.
Restore the key store file specified in the configuration property
FLOATLIC_PATH from a recent backup, or contact Sparx Systems Support for
assistance.
Key file has been moved The key store file specified by the configuration property FLOATLIC_PATH is
locked to the serial number of the hard drive it is created on. If the key store file is
moved from this hard drive, then other Floating License Servers are unable to open
it.
If the key store file has been moved, restore the file to its initial location. Certain
RAID configurations can affect how the hard drive's serial number is presented to
the Floating License Server. Thus, it is recommended that you house the key store
file on a non RAID drive, wherever possible.
Errors while using Enterprise Architect and the Floating License Server
Issue Comments
Checkout Failure: There
are no more available keys
for this product in the keyKeys for this product exist; however, they are all checked out to other users.
If this error is frequently reported, consider limiting the use of the product across
your enterprise or purchasing more keys to meet the demand for the product.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 164 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
store
Checkout Failure: The key
store does not contain any
keys for this productThis keystore does not contain keys for the requested product. Keys for the product
might have been provided by the keystore in the past, but have since been removed.
Uninstall the product and return any shared keys on the client machine.
Checkin Failure: Key not
found in keystore.The key being checked in has either been deleted since it was checked out, or was
checked out from another keystore.
Ensure that users return any shared keys to the key store they were leased from
before swapping Floating License Servers / key stores.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 165 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA
Sparx System's WebEA is an application designed to display the data from Enterprise Architect models in a web
browser, which means users can review and comment on a model in real time, on a range of mobile devices or a remote
work station, without needing to install Enterprise Architect.
WebEA is a component of the Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server, which is a separately-installed and licensed product, to
complement Enterprise Architect. WebEA makes use of the PHP, HTML, CSS3 and javascript technologies and requires
a web server (such as Apache or IIS) to host it. The topics of this chapter explain how to install and configure WebEA in
detail, but if you are interested in getting started quickly see the WebEA Quick Start Guide for the necessary steps.
Requirements
Users of WebEA require a HTML5 / CSS3 compatible web browser ·
The WebEA interface requires JavaScript to be enabled in the web browser ·
A client's device will require network connectivity to the web server hosting WebEA ·
Users of WebEA will require this information in order to connect to and log into a WebEA model: ·
    - The complete URL; that is, machine name/IP number and optionally the port number and/or the
       path to the WebEA files, depending on how the web server has been configured
    - The name of the model to access
    - (Optional) an access code necessary to open a model, if one has been configured
    - (Optional) the user ID and password required to open a model, if user security has been applied
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 166 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA Quick Start Guide
The purpose of the WebEA Quick Start Guide is to provide the complete process for quickly installing and configuring
WebEA in a new environment using the most common options.
The process is based on these assumptions:
A clean Windows 7 (or later) based machine has been selected to host both the Pro Cloud Server and Web Server; ·
that is, no other Web Servers or applications are configured to listen on port 80
The latest version of XAMPP will be used to install Apache as the Web Server ·
WebEA will access one brand new Firebird model (because it is the simplest, as it does not require any third party ·
ODBC drivers)
The Enterprise Architect user base is using Enterprise Architect 13.5 or later ·
1. Download the Pro Cloud Server
Step Description
1.1 When you purchase the Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server the sales team will send you a link to download
the installer.
2. Install the Web Server
Step Description
2.1 XAMPP is available at https://www.apachefriends.org/download.html. Download the latest version for
Windows, to the machine's desktop.
2.2 The XAMPP installer should be run with Administration privileges; on the desktop, right-click on the
XAMPP installer icon and select 'Run as Administrator'.
2.3 Proceed through the installation process, accepting the defaults until the Select Components screen
displays.
Deselect these checkboxes: MySQL, FileZilla, Mercury, Tomcat, Perl, phpMyAdmin, Webalizer and Fake
Sendmail. WebEA only requires the minimum XAMPP installation of Apache and PHP.
Click on the Next button.
2.4 The installation folder should be set to C:\xampp. Click on the Next button until the installation starts.
When the installation finishes, select the option to open the Control Panel, then complete the installation.
3. Configure the Web Server
With the default XAMPP configuration, the default website will use port 80. Its base folder is C:\xampp\htdocs.
Step Description
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 167 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
3.1 Using the XAMPP control panel, start Apache. No errors should be reported at this stage.
4. Install Pro Cloud Server
Step Description
4.1 The Pro Cloud Server installer is a standard MSI; double-click on it to start the installation.
Note: Depending on a number of factors, you might be prompted for the credentials of a user with
elevated permissions; these must be entered before the installation will continue.
4.2 The 'Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Services Setup' dialog displays. Click on the Next button.
4.3 Read the license agreement and select the checkbox for indicating that you accept the terms. Click on the
Next button.
4.4 Read the information about the Pro Cloud Server. Click on the Next button.
4.5 The 'Custom Setup' page displays. Click on the Next button to accept the defaults.
4.6 Click on the Install button to run the installation.
5. Configure the Pro Cloud Server
The Pro Cloud Server will have installed all of its files to the 'C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\'
folder and added a Shortcut to the desktop.
Step Description
5.1 Run the 'Pro Cloud Config Client' or 'Pro Cloud Express Configuration Client' shortcut which was added
to your desktop.
5.2 Enter the Server address of "localhost:803" and click on the OK button.
5.3 Click on the Licensing button, then Add.
Enter your Pro Cloud server License key, then click OK.
Click on OK to close the Pro Cloud Server License Manager dialog.
5.4 Select the Ports tab
Select Port "804" from the list and click on the Edit button.
Tick the checkbox OSLC Supported, then click OK.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 168 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
5.5 Select the Database Managers tab, then click on the Add button.
Type the name 'fb-procloud.feap' in the connection string field, then click on the OK button.
Select the new entry in the list and click on the Edit button.
On the Configure Database Manager screen, select the Enabled and Enable Pro Features (OSLC,
WebEA and Integration) checkboxes.
Click on the OK button.
For a more in depth explanation of how to add database managers, see the Help topic Add Database 
Manager.
5.6 Open the standard Windows Services console (command "services.msc"), locate and select the service
"Sparx Systems Professional Cloud", then restart it.
6. Copy WebEA files to Website
Step Description
6.1 Copy the folder C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\WebEA\ to C:\xampp\htdocs.
7. Configure WebEA to access the model
To give a better demonstration of the WebEA options, we will define three different WebEA model connections. All will
connect to the same physical Firebird database.
Each model connection will have its own set of options that control how users will be able to interact with the data.
Step Description
7.1 Open the file 'C:\xampp\htdocs\WebEA\includes\webea_config.ini' with a text editor.
7.2 In the "[model_list]" section, remove the 'model4' and 'model5' lines. Edit the remaining model names to:
model1 = "Pro Cloud Model (no updates)"
model2 = "Pro Cloud Model with discussions"
model3 = "Pro Cloud Model with access code"
7.3 In the "[model1 : settings]" section change the SSCS_DB_ALIAS option to "fb-procloud". The remaining
default options should remain unchanged.
7.4 In the "[model2 : settings]" section change the SSCS_DB_ALIAS option to "fb-procloud". The remaining
default options should remain unchanged.
7.5 Delete the "[model3 : settings]" and "[model5 : settings]" sections, rename the "[model4 : settings] section
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 169 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
header to [model3 : settings]", then set these options as shown:
  sscs_db_alias = "fb-procloud"
  sscs_port = "804"
  sscs_use_ssl = "false"
  sscs_model_user = ""
  ssc_model_pwd = ""
  auth_code = "password01".
  login_prompt = "false"
7.6 Save the changes to the file webea_config.ini in C:\xampp\htdocs\WebEA\includes.
8. Configure your firewall(s) to allow client access
Step Description
8.1 Firewall rules will have to be adjusted to allow traffic between the [Client] and [Web Server], on ports 80
and 443.
8.2 Firewall rules will have to be adjusted to allow traffic between the [Web Server] and [Pro Cloud Server],
on ports 804 and 805.
9. Use Enterprise Architect to add content
The initial Firebird model we created earlier will be empty. The easiest way to add content to the model is with
Enterprise Architect.
Step Description
9.1 On a client machine with access to the web server, open Enterprise Architect v13.5 or later.
9.2From the main menu select 'Open Project...' or, from the ribbon, select the '
  > Open Project'
option.
9.3 Click on the Connect to Cloud button.
9.4 On the 'Cloud Connection' screen set these parameters:
Name:         fb-procloud
Protocol:     http://
Server:        {your servername}
Port:        804
Model Name:    fb-procloud
Click on the OK button.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 170 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
9.5 Open the 'Configure > Model > Options > Cloud' options and tick these checkboxes:
Auto create Diagram Image and Image Map (each time a Diagram is saved) ·
Auto create HTML Page (each time a Linked Document is saved) ·
These options ensure diagrams and Linked Documents are saved in a format that allows them to be
viewed in WebEA.
9.6 Create a sample set of Model Views, Packages, diagrams and elements, so that they can be viewed in
WebEA later.
10. Test WebEA access
Step Description
10.1 On a client machine, open an internet browser and enter the URL
http://{yourwebserver}/WebEA/login.php, where the value '{yourwebserver}' is either the name or IP
number of the machine hosting the WebEA website. The WebEA login screen displays, listing the three
model connections we defined earlier:
Pro Cloud Model (no updates) ·
Pro Cloud Model with discussions ·
Pro Cloud Model with access code ·
10.2 Select the first model connection - Pro Cloud Model (no updates) - and click on the Next button. This
connects you to the model and displays the model views that are defined.
From here you should be able to navigate through the model by selecting Packages, diagrams and
elements. When you select an element, its complete details are displayed. Because of the way this model
connection is defined, the bottom of the properties section will NOT contain the 'Discussions' section.
10.3 Click on the 'hamburger' icon in the top right corner of the display, and select the 'Logout' option. Then
select the second model connection - Pro Cloud Model with discussions - and click on the Next button.
You should see the same model views as before; now navigate to an element and confirm that the
'Discussions' section is visible.
10.4 Once again, click on the 'hamburger' icon in the top right corner, and select the 'Logout' option.
Select the third model connection, 'Pro Cloud Model with access code' and click on the Next button. This
time you should be presented with a prompt for the Access Code; enter 'password01' (as we defined in
step 7.5) and click on the Login button. You should see the same model views as before. Navigate to an
element; this time there should be a blue 'hamburger' menu in the element details area that allows the
creation of element features such as tests and resource allocations. There should also be a pencil icon next
to the element notes area that, when clicked on, will allow the modification of element notes.
Complete
This quick start procedure is now complete. It has shown you how to install and configure a basic installation of WebEA.
The Sparx System's online Help documentation has more detailed instructions and explains all possible options that can
be configured. See the section Model Repository | Cloud Based Repositories | Pro Cloud Server in the Enterprise
Architect online Help.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 171 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 172 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA Quick Start Guide - IIS
The purpose of the WebEA Quick Start Guide - IIS is to provide the complete process for quickly installing and
configuring WebEA in a new IIS environment using the most common options.
The process is based on these assumptions:
A clean Windows Server 2012 (or later) based machine has been selected to host both the Pro Cloud Server and ·
Web Server; that is, no other Web Servers or applications are configured to listen on port 80
IIS will be used as the Web Server ·
WebEA will access one brand new Firebird model (because it is the simplest, as it does not require any third party ·
ODBC drivers)
The Enterprise Architect user base is using Enterprise Architect 13.5 or later ·
1. Download the Pro Cloud Server
Step Description
1.1 When you purchase the Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server the sales team will send you a link to download
the installer.
2. Install the Web Server
Step Description
2.1 Enable IIS on Windows Server by running the Server Manager and selecting 'Add roles and features'
2.2 Proceed through the installation process, accepting the defaults until the Server Roles screen displays.
Select the 'Web Server (IIS)' checkbox.
Continue through the installation, accepting defaults.
2.3 -
Insta
ll
PHPInstall PHP for IIS with 'Microsoft Web Platform Installer', available from:
https://www.microsoft.com/web/downloads/platform.aspx
Run Microsoft Web Platform Install and select 'Products > Frameworks'.
Select the version of PHP required (for example, 'PHP 7.2.2 (x64)').
Click on the Add button and Install button.
(This will download the required files and install them for use with IIS.)
3. Configure the Web Server
With the default IIS configuration, the default website will use port 80. Its base folder is
%SystemDrive%\inetpub\wwwroot which is normally C:\inetpub\wwwroot.
Step Description
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 173 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
3.1 No additional configuration is required. Test the connection by browsing to server address from another
computer. "Internet Information Services" landing page should display.
4. Install Pro Cloud Server
Step Description
4.1 The Pro Cloud Server installer is a standard MSI; double-click on it to start the installation.
Note: Depending on a number of factors, you might be prompted for the credentials of a user with
elevated permissions; these must be entered before the installation will continue.
4.2 The 'Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Services Setup' dialog displays. Click on the Next button.
4.3 Read the license agreement and select the checkbox for indicating that you accept the terms. Click on the
Next button.
4.4 Read the information about the Pro Cloud Server. Click on the Next button.
4.5 The 'Custom Setup' page displays. Click on the Next button to accept the defaults.
4.6 Click on the Install button to run the installation.
5. Configure the Pro Cloud Server
The Pro Cloud Server will have installed all of its files to the 'C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\'
folder and added a Shortcut to the desktop.
Step Description
5.1 Run the 'Pro Cloud Config Client' or 'Pro Cloud Express Configuration Client' shortcut which was added
to your desktop.
5.2 Enter the Server address of "localhost:803" and click on the OK button.
5.3 Click on the Licensing button, then Add.
Enter your Pro Cloud server License key, then click OK.
Click on OK to close the Pro Cloud Server License Manager dialog.
5.4 Select the Ports tab
Select Port "804" from the list and click on the Edit button.
Tick the checkbox OSLC Supported, then click OK.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 174 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
5.5 Select the Database Managers tab, then click on the Add button.
Type the name 'fb-procloud.feap' in the connection string field, then click on the OK button.
Select the new entry in the list and click on the Edit button.
On the Configure Database Manager screen, select the Enabled and Enable Pro Features (OSLC,
WebEA and Integration) checkboxes.
Click on the OK button.
For a more in depth explanation of how to add database managers, see the Help topic Add Database 
Manager.
5.6 Open the standard Windows Services console (command "services.msc"), locate and select the service
"Sparx Systems Professional Cloud", then restart it.
6. Copy WebEA files to Website
Step Description
6.1 Delete the default IIS files from C:\inetpub\wwwroot
6.2 Copy the folder C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\WebEA\ to C:\inetpub\wwwroot.
7. Configure WebEA to access the model
To give a better demonstration of the WebEA options, we will define three different WebEA model connections. All will
connect to the same physical Firebird database.
Each model connection will have its own set of options that control how users will be able to interact with the data.
Step Description
7.1 Open the file 'C:\inetpub\wwwroot\WebEA\includes\webea_config.ini' with a text editor.
7.2 In the "[model_list]" section, remove the 'model4' and 'model5' lines. Edit the remaining model names to:
model1 = "Pro Cloud Model (no updates)"
model2 = "Pro Cloud Model with discussions"
model3 = "Pro Cloud Model with access code"
7.3 In the "[model1 : settings]" section change the SSCS_DB_ALIAS option to "fb-procloud". The remaining
default options should remain unchanged.
7.4 In the "[model2 : settings]" section change the SSCS_DB_ALIAS option to "fb-procloud". The remaining
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 175 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
default options should remain unchanged.
7.5 Delete the "[model3 : settings]" and "[model5 : settings]" sections, rename the "[model4 : settings] section
header to [model3 : settings]", then set these options as shown:
  sscs_db_alias = "fb-procloud"
  sscs_port = "804"
  sscs_use_ssl = "false"
  sscs_model_user = ""
  ssc_model_pwd = ""
  auth_code = "password01".
  login_prompt = "false"
7.6 Save the changes to the file webea_config.ini in C:\inetpub\wwwroot\WebEA\includes.
8. Configure your firewall(s) to allow client access
Step Description
8.1 Firewall rules will have to be adjusted to allow traffic between the [Client] and [Web Server], on ports 80
and 443.
8.2 Firewall rules will have to be adjusted to allow traffic between the [Web Server] and [Pro Cloud Server],
on ports 804 and 805.
9. Use Enterprise Architect to add content
The initial Firebird model we created earlier will be empty. The easiest way to add content to the model is with
Enterprise Architect.
Step Description
9.1 On a client machine with access to the web server, open Enterprise Architect v13.5 or later.
9.2From the main menu select 'Open Project...' or, from the ribbon, select the '
  > Open Project'
option.
9.3 Click on the Connect to Cloud button.
9.4 On the 'Cloud Connection' screen set these parameters:
Name:         fb-procloud
Protocol:     http://
Server:        {your servername}
Port:        804
Model Name:    fb-procloud
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 176 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Click on the OK button.
9.5 Open the 'Configure > Model > Options > Cloud' options and tick these checkboxes:
Auto create Diagram Image and Image Map (each time a Diagram is saved) ·
Auto create HTML Page (each time a Linked Document is saved) ·
These options ensure diagrams and Linked Documents are saved in a format that allows them to be
viewed in WebEA.
9.6 Create a sample set of Model Views, Packages, diagrams and elements, so that they can be viewed in
WebEA later.
10. Test WebEA access
Step Description
10.1 On a client machine, open an internet browser and enter the URL
http://{yourwebserver}/WebEA/login.php, where the value '{yourwebserver}' is either the name or IP
number of the machine hosting the WebEA website. The WebEA login screen displays, listing the three
model connections we defined earlier:
Pro Cloud Model (no updates) ·
Pro Cloud Model with discussions ·
Pro Cloud Model with access code ·
10.2 Select the first model connection - Pro Cloud Model (no updates) - and click on the Next button. This
connects you to the model and displays the model views that are defined.
From here you should be able to navigate through the model by selecting Packages, diagrams and
elements. When you select an element, its complete details are displayed. Because of the way this model
connection is defined, the bottom of the properties section will NOT contain the 'Discussions' section.
10.3 Click on the 'hamburger' icon in the top right corner of the display, and select the 'Logout' option. Then
select the second model connection - Pro Cloud Model with discussions - and click on the Next button.
You should see the same model views as before; now navigate to an element and confirm that the
'Discussions' section is visible.
10.4 Once again, click on the 'hamburger' icon in the top right corner, and select the 'Logout' option.
Select the third model connection, 'Pro Cloud Model with access code' and click on the Next button. This
time you should be presented with a prompt for the Access Code; enter 'password01' (as we defined in
step 7.5) and click on the Login button. You should see the same model views as before. Navigate to an
element; this time there should be a blue 'hamburger' menu in the element details area that allows the
creation of element features such as tests and resource allocations. There should also be a pencil icon next
to the element notes area that, when clicked on, will allow the modification of element notes.
Complete
This quick start procedure is now complete. It has shown you how to install and configure a basic installation of WebEA
on IIS. The Sparx System's online Help documentation has more detailed instructions and explains all possible options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 177 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
that can be configured. See the section 'Model Repository | Cloud Based Repositories | Pro Cloud Server' in the
Enterprise Architect online Help.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 178 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA Installation and Configuration
The Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server product is installed using a standard Microsoft Windows Installer package that
includes a number of optional components. WebEA is one of these components and is installed by default. It is possible
to change the install location of WebEA; however, if the defaults are used WebEA will be installed into the C:\Program
Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\WebEA\ folder (assuming a 64 bit machine is being used).
See the Cloud Server Installation and Cloud Service Configuration Help topics for a full description of how to install and
configure the Sparx Systems Cloud Service.
Important: If you are installing the Pro Cloud Server on a machine that already has the Sparx Systems Cloud Services
or Sparx Systems WAN Optimizer installed then these should be uninstalled first.
WebEA Server Requirements
In order to run WebEA in your environment you must have:
A Web Server (Apache or IIS) capable of hosting PHP v7.0 (or later) ·
A Web Server with these standard PHP extensions installed and enabled: core, curl, date, gettext, hash, json, libxml, ·
mbstring, pcre, session, standard and tokenizer
A Web Server with PHP sessions enabled ·
Communication between the web server and the server hosting the Pro Cloud Server ·
A base folder (on the web server) to store the WebEA website pages ·
Configuration Steps
The installation of the WebEA application should have already been completed by following the steps outlined in the
Cloud Server Installation topic, making sure that the WebEA component was installed.
In additional to installing the Pro Cloud server, WebEA also needs a web server to host it. In the simplest configuration
the web server would be installed on the same machine as the Pro Cloud Server.
Configuring WebEA applies these steps:
Step Action
1 Decide what models are going to be available to WebEA users.
At the same time it is worth considering these points, which will determine the configuration options of
each model.
Is user security currently configured on the model? ·
Should WebEA users be prompted for their model user and password? ·
Should WebEA users be able to view element discussions? ·
Should WebEA users be able to add element discussions? ·
Should WebEA users be able to join and participate in reviews? ·
Should WebEA users be able to insert new objects, and if so, what types? ·
Should WebEA users be able to add new element features, and if so, what types? ·
Should WebEA users be able to edit element notes? ·
Should WebEA users be able to edit element tests? ·
Should WebEA users be able to edit element resource allocations? ·
What is the default list of watchlist items for the model? ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 179 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
2 Ensure a database manager is defined for each model decided on in step 1, in the Cloud Service's database
manager list. The process to do this is as outlined for the core Sparx Systems Cloud Service, in Add
Database Manager.
3 Enter your License key into the SSCloudServices.config file (by default found in the 'C:\Program Files
(x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Service\' folder). To edit this file you will require Administrator
privileges.
Tip: Add this line, replacing the zeroes with your license key.
LICENSE={00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000}
4 For each of the Cloud Services ports that will be accessed by WebEA models, check that the option
'OSLC_SUPPORT' is set to '1' in the SSCloudServices.config file, and save any changes.
Tip: Add/edit the OSLC_SUPPORT option to enable OSLC on the given port.
OSLC_SUPPORT=1
5 Ensure that the Windows service 'Sparx Systems Professional Cloud' has been restarted since making
changes to the configuration file (in the previous steps), so that new options are loaded.
6 For each of the models decided on in step 1, select the model on the 'Sparx Systems Cloud Services
Configuration Client', click on the Configure button and select the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA
and Integration)' checkbox.
7 Check that you can access the model(s) in Enterprise Architect using the 'Connect to Cloud' option.
After opening each model in Enterprise Architect, enable the 'Data Cache' options and click on the Create
button to generate the initial set of viewable diagrams and Linked Documents. See the Model
Configuration topic for details.
8 Download/install and configure your web server for PHP, according to your requirements.
Tip: XAMPP is the most common Apache/PHP web server that includes all the required components; it is
available for Windows/Linux and OS X at https://www.apachefriends.org/download.html. WebEA has
been tested on all of the currently available versions of PHP, but if your environment has no special
requirements then Sparx Systems would recommend v7.1.1 for Windows. All further Quick Start points
will assume this configuration.
Note: WebEA only requires the minimum XAMPP installation, Apache and PHP; it does not require
MySQL, FileZilla Mercury, Tomcat or any of the other optional components, so if you have no need for
these components Sparx Systems would recommend to not install them.
9 Define and configure a website for WebEA in your web server.
As there are many different web servers and configurations, configuring the web site for WebEA,
deciding what port the web server will listen to, and making sure the website is secure from external
attacks, are all outside the scope of this documentation.
Tip: Using the default XAMPP configuration, the port for the default website is 80 and the base folder is
at 'C:\xampp\htdocs'. XAMPP will already have added files to this folder; WebEA does not require these
files, so if you have no need for them, move them to a backup location.
10 Copy the contents of the entire WebEA installation folder ('C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud
Services\WebEA\') to the base folder of the website.
Tip: Copy WebEA folder from 'C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\WebEA\' to
'C:\xampp\htdocs'.
Special Note regarding reinstalls: before updating the WebEA files, take a backup of the files you have
modified, ie \includes\webea_config.ini and \includes\webea_strings.ini.
11 Due to the sensitive nature of some of the information contained in the WebEA configuration file, we
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 180 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
recommend that the '\includes\' folder within the WebEA folder is severely restricted so that only PHP can
access the files within. For example, in Apache this is achieved with this entry in the Apache configure
file:
    <Directory "{website_path}/includes">
         AllowOverride none
         options none
         Require all denied
    </Directory>
Once your web server is configured and the WebEA application files copied into the base folder,
restart/start the web server.
Tip: Using the XAMPP control panel, Stop/Start Apache.
12 Edit the '\includes\webea_config.ini' file and define each model decided on in step 1.
See the How to configure WebEA models Help topic for more details on what each option means in
WebEA's config file.
Tip: Edit 'C:\xampp\htdocs\includes\webea_config.ini' file, and update all parameters with the prefix
'SSCS_' to that of a defined repository in your Cloud Service.
Special Note regarding reinstalls: if you a have a previous backup of the \includes\webea_config.ini file
and wish to use the same configuration, you can simply restore the backup file.
13 On a remote machine, open an internet browser and enter the URL of http://{yourwebserver}/login.php,
where the value '{yourwebserver}' is either the name or IP number of the machine hosting the WebEA
website. This should display the WebEA login screen that lists the models which are defined in the
webea_config.ini file.
14 Other considerations:
If you require different lists of models (or different options) for different user bases, then it is possible ·
to define multiple websites, each with their own dedicated port and base folder, using Apache's
virtual hosts. This could mean user group A could access its set of models with the URL
http://{yourwebserver}:180/ while user group B would use the URL http://{yourwebserver}:200/
Firewall rules will have to be adjusted to allow traffic between the [Client] and [Web Server] ·
Firewall rules will have to be adjusted to allow traffic between the [Web Server] and [Pro Cloud ·
Server]
HTTPS and SSL
If the models have SSL enabled and are using self-signed certificates, then see Advanced SSL for advanced
configuration of WebEA.
Model Configuration
Action Description
Configure Enterprise
Architect model optionsBy default, diagrams and Linked Documents are not saved in a format that is
viewable by web browsers. In order for users of WebEA to view these components,
Enterprise Architect must be configured to generate (and store) viewable versions
of them whenever changes are made. The options to generate viewable diagrams
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 181 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
and Linked Documents are defined at the model level.
With the model open in Enterprise Architect, select the 'Configure > Model >
Options' ribbon option. On the 'Manage Project Options' dialog, refer to the 'Data
Cache' options on the 'Cloud' page.
The first option (if enabled), in addition to saving a diagram normally will also
generate and save a static image of the diagram.
The second option (if enabled), in addition to saving a Linked Document normally
will also generate and save the document in HTML format.
If these options are not enabled, diagrams and Linked Documents will not be
viewable from within WebEA.
When initially configuring a model to auto create viewable diagrams and Linked
Documents, it is advisable to click on the Create button to generate the initial set of
viewable diagrams and Linked Documents. While this is not mandatory, viewable
versions of all existing diagrams and Linked Documents will not exist until they are
saved.
Note: This approach is relevant when all Enterprise Architect users are using a
build later than 1350. If, however, some of your user base is using older versions of
Enterprise Architect then updates to diagrams and Linked Documents will not be
reflected immediately when saved.
See the How to configure automatic viewable components Help topic for the
recommended approach to overcome this situation.
Configure model users It is possible for WebEA users to connect to user security enabled models in one of
two ways:
Using their model User Login and Password; that is, the same credentials they ·
use when connecting to the model with Enterprise Architect, or
If the model has been configured in WebEA to not require login credentials ·
then all users will be logged in under the one user account (using the
sscs_model_user and sscs_model_pwd defined in the 'webea_config.ini' file)
Acknowledgements
WebEA incorporates certain components developed by third parties. Sparx Systems acknowledges the contribution made
to the WebEA product by these components.
jQuery v1.12.3 - jQuery Foundation ·
NicEdit ©2007-2008, Brian Kirchoff, under license from MIT ·
Date Picker for jQuery v5.1.1, Keith Wood, under license from MIT ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 182 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
How to configure automatic viewable components
While Sparx Systems recommend that users should always use the latest release of Enterprise Architect, we do
acknowledge that in some situations this is hard to achieve. Therefore, in order for WebEA (and the Pro Cloud Server) to
function correctly when users are using builds of Enterprise Architect earlier than 1350, the Pro Cloud Server includes a
custom version of Enterprise Architect (referred to as the EA Worker) that will automate the generation of WebEA
viewable diagrams and Linked Documents.
Each instance of an EA Worker is capable of connecting to a single model, and typically runs on the same server as the
Pro Cloud Service.
How to run EA Worker
The 'EA Worker' application does not have a GUI of any kind, therefore it is started with two command line options:
cloudupdate: - the frequency (measured in seconds) of how often the application should check for new or modified 1.
diagrams and Linked Documents.
A connection string to the model, defined as a .EAP file. 2.
An example command line is:
    C:\> EA.exe /cloudupdate:30 "C:\EA\shortcuts\model1.eap"
Typically the easiest and most efficient method to run the EA Worker is with a Windows batch/command file.
Model shortcuts for EA Worker
Within Enterprise Architect it is possible to save model connections (no matter what type of DBMS is in use) as a .EAP
file. These model shortcuts are not .EAP file databases, but plain text files that contain a connection string to a model.
An example .EAP shortcut to a model without security:
   EAConnectString:model1 --- ;Connect=Cloud=protocol:http,address:localhost,port:804;Data Source=model1;
However, when the model has security enabled the connection string requires a USER and PASSWORD parameters:
   EAConnectString:model1 --- ;Connect=Cloud=protocol:http,address:localhost,port:804,user:fred,pwd:pwdxxx;Data
Source=model1;
EA Worker Configuration Steps
Step Description
1 Create a .EAP shortcut to the model.
The creation of a .EAP shortcut file can be achieved by either:
1) Manually creating a plain text file, renaming its extension to .EAP and entering the complete
connection string as shown (making sure to replace all values enclosed in {}):
    EAConnectString:{modelname} ---
;Connect=Cloud=protocol:http,address:{servername},port:{port},user:{username},pwd:{password};Data
Source={modelname};
    or
2) In Enterprise Architect, open a Cloud connection to the model in question and then choose 'Save As
Shortcut...' from the 
  drop-down menu.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 183 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
2 Create a batch/command file.
Create a plain text file, give it a meaningful name, and change its extension to .CMD. Then edit the file
and enter this text, making sure to replace {seconds} with the number of seconds and {filepath} with the
location of the fully qualified .EAP created in the previous step:
    "C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Worker\EA.exe" /cloudupdate:{seconds}
"{filepath}"
3 Run the batch/command file.
Double-click on the file created in the previous step.
Sparx System recommends that this batch/command file is added to Startup so that it is automatically run
when the server starts.
Lifecycle of EA Worker
The EA Worker application is designed to connect to the specified model automatically when it starts; if there is a
problem with the connection the application ends. If the connection string is valid and the EA Worker connects to the
model it will run continually until the server is restarted or until the process is manually terminated.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 184 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
How to configure WebEA models
All WebEA configuration is controlled by a single file, which must reside in the '\includes\' folder and which must have
the name 'webea_config.ini'.
The configuration file is a plain text file. Options are grouped under section headers, which are enclosed by square
brackets. Each option must be defined on a separate line and follow the syntax:
  {option name} = "{option value}"
Note that:
Option values are enclosed by double quotes ·
The configuration file supports comments; the semi-colon character starts a comment ·
The default 'webea_config.ini' file included in the installation package contains samples of how models can be ·
configured
Why are there so many options?
In order to offer the greatest level of flexibility in how WebEA models can be accessed and used, Sparx Systems
provides a large number of configuration options, which can be daunting when the complete list is viewed for the first
time. However, to minimize your effort in understanding and managing the options, most are also grouped by prefix
(sscs, login, add, edit and wl), which helps you to quickly understand what a particular option is used for.
The Model List
The first section in the configuration file is '[model_list]'; this section defines the model names that will be displayed to
WebEA users on the 'Login' page. There is no limit to the number of models that can be defined; however, when there
are more than ten models the login screen will automatically show a vertical scroll bar.
The model names have no direct link to the physical server or database name of the models they are describing, so you
are free to use any meaningful name.
For example:
    [model_list]
    model1 = "Model One (no updates)"
    model2 = "Model One with discussions"
    model3 = "Model Two with user login"
    model4 = "Model Three with all options"
    model5 = "Sparx Systems Sample Model"
Note: it is important that the 'modelx' definitions are consecutive; any out-of-sequence model numbers will be ignored
and no further models will be added to the WebEA Login page.
Model options
For each numbered model found in the '[model_list]' section a matching '[modelx : settings]' section is expected, further
down the configuration file. All options within this section relate to that model only; that is, options can not be shared
between models.
For example:
    [model1 : settings]
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 185 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
    sscs_protocol = "http"
    sscs_server = "localhost"
    sscs_port = "80"
    sscs_db_alias = "model1"
    auth_code = ""
    login_prompt = "false"
    default_diagram = ""
    show_discuss = "false"
Model connection settings
Probably the most important settings for any model are the connection-related ones, prefixed with sscs_ (which stands
for 'Sparx Systems Cloud Service'). This group of settings defines how WebEA will connect and communicate with the
Cloud Service for data retrieval.
All communication between WebEA and the Cloud Service is performed via the PHP cURL library, therefore some of
the connection settings relate directly to the cURL options.
Option Description
sscs_protocol Defines the protocol to be used to connect to the Sparx Systems Cloud Service.
Options:     http or https
Default:     http
Example:    sscs_protocol = "http"
Note: When using the https protocol the configuration should also include
sscs_use_ssl = "true". If you are using a self-signed certificate then
sscs_enforce_certs = "false" should also be included.
sscs_port Defines the TCP port used to connect to the Sparx Systems Cloud Service. This
port number must match one of the ports the Sparx Systems Cloud Service is
listening to or, in the case of an IIS setup, the IIS port servicing this repository.
Default:        80
Example:    sscs_port = "804"
sscs_server Defines the fully qualified machine name or IP address of the server hosting the
Cloud Service.
Default:    localhost
Example:     sscs_server = "sparxpublic.com" or sscs_server = "197.168.0.10"
sscs_use_ssl As of WebEA version 3.01.23.1690 (included in Pro Cloud Server 3.0.23) this
option is no longer used, instead WebEA determines this value dynamically based
on the protocol in use, HTTP - sscs_use_ssl=false and HTTPS - sscs_use_ssl=true.
WebEA versions prior to 3.0.23.1690 uses this value to defines if all
communications between WebEA and Cloud Services should use SSL (secure
socket layer). When this value is true, the protocol should be set to "https".
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Example:     sscs_use_ssl = "false"
Defines the database alias name of the model repository hosted on the Cloud
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 186 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
sscs_db_alias Service. This corresponds to the 'Database Alias' identified in the Cloud Services
Configuration Client or the 'Model Name' on the Enterprise Architect's Cloud
Connection screen. The value is case sensitive.
Default:    ea
Example:    sscs_db_alias = "RepositoryName"
sscs_enforce_certs When SSL is set to true this option defines whether or not cURL will enforce that
the certificate installed in Cloud Services is correctly signed by a Certificate
Authority.
Note: If you are using a self-signed certificate for Cloud Services, this option must
be set to false.
Options:     true or false
Default:    true
Example:     sscs_enforce_certs = "false"
sscs_model_user Defines the model user login (as defined in Enterprise Architect User Security) that
will be used in combination with the sscs_model_pwd option to login to a security
enabled model.
Note:
Starting in Pro Cloud Server version 3.0.23 - When set, all other authentication ·
schemes are bypassed, including Windows Authentication, OpenID and basic
username/password login.
Sparx Systems would recommend the use of this option only on a model that ·
has been configured as read only, since all updates made by WebEA users in
this configuration will be identified as the same user.
Default:
Example:    sscs_model_user = "webuser"
sscs_model_pwd Defines the password (as defined in Enterprise Architect User Security) that will be
used in combination with the sscs_model_user option to login to a security enabled
model.
Note:
Starting in Pro Cloud Server version 3.0.23 - When set, all other authentication ·
schemes are bypassed, including Windows Authentication, OpenID and basic
username/password login.
Sparx Systems would recommend the use of this option only on a model that ·
has been configured as read only, since all updates made by WebEA users in
this configuration will be identified as the same user.
Default:
Example:    sscs_model_pwd = "pwdxxx"
Model general settings
These options define how WebEA users can access and display objects within the model.
Option Description
auth_code Defines the authorization code all WebEA users must enter before they can access
the model. If this value is blank, WebEA users are not prompted to enter a code.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 187 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
This option is only used for basic username/password authentication and is not used
for Windows Authentication or OpenID.
It's possible to set this option and also set sscs_model_user. In this case the user
will be required to enter the access code only and will not be prompted for a
username or password.
Options:    text
Default:    blank
Example:     auth_code = "JWG478"
navigate_to_diagram As of WebEA version 3.01.23.1690 (included in Pro Cloud Server 3.0.23) the
default selection of some objects on diagrams has changed to match Enterprise
Architect behavior.  This applies to i) Composite Elements and ii) Package
elements that contain a diagram.
Composite Elements
A composite element on a diagram will navigate directly its composite diagram.
Package Elements
A Package element on a diagram will navigate to the first child diagram contained
within the selected Package. If the selected Package does not contain any diagrams
then the package's properties are displayed.
When navigate_to_diagram is set to false, selecting either a composite element or
package element on a diagram will display the selected elements properties.
Options:    true or false
Default:    true
Example:    composite_navigates = "false"
login_prompt This option is no longer used as of WebEA version 3.0.23.1690 (included in Pro
Cloud Server 3.0.23). Basic authentication username and password fields will show
for models that allow basic authentication (that is, are not restricted to SSO
logins).
The basic authentication (username/password) will show for security enabled
models that have not set sscs_model_user.
Windows Authentication, if enabled for the model, will be attempted automatically
when selecting the model.
OpenID authentication, if enabled in the model, will show above any basic
authentication prompt.
For older versions of WebEA the option is used to define whether or not all WebEA
users must enter a model user/password before they can access the model.
Note: When this option is set to false and the model has security enabled, the
sscs_model_user and sscs_model_pwd options must also be used to specify the
logon credentials.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Example:     login_prompt = "false"
login_allow_blank_pwd When the 'login_prompt' option is set to true, this option defines whether or not
WebEA will attempt to send blank passwords to the Cloud Services for validation.
Options:     true or false
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 188 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Default:    false
Example:     login_allow_blank_pwd = "false"
miniprops_navigates When the 'miniprops_navigates' option is set to true selecting certain 'navigable'
elements will cause WebEA to navigate to the target of these elements. Examples
of such 'navigable' elements are Hyperlinks and Navigation Cells.  For all other
elements, selecting them will display the properties of the element in the Properties
View. This option has no effect when the Properties View is not shown.
Options:     true or false
Default:    true
Example:     miniprops_navigates = "false"
participate_in_reviews When set to true, 'participate_in_reviews' allows users of WebEA to Join reviews
that will automatically assign all discussions to the joined review. In order to make
full use of this option show_discuss and add_discuss would also have to be set to
true.
Options:    true or false
Default:    false
Example:     participate_in_reviews = "false"
recent_search_days Defines the number of days the predefined 'Recent ...' searches should consider. For
example if this value was set to '7' then whenever a user invokes the search for
'Recent elements', all elements modified in the previous 7 days will be returned.
Options:    any positive integer value
Default:    3
Example:    recent_search_days = "10"
use_avatars When the 'use_avatars' option is set to true, all discussion messages are displayed
with the creating user's avatar. When set to false a set of generic images
representing discussions and replies is used instead.
Options:     true or false
Default:    true
Example:     use_avatars = "false"
prop_sec_<section>_visibl
eDefines whether or not a property section (or "feature") is accessible.
If a feature is not visible then the button to display that feature will not be available
in the Main View, and the Feature will not be listed in the 'Select Feature' menu in
the Properties View.
<section> can be one of:
location ·
instances ·
relationships ·
taggedvalues ·
testing·
resourcealloc ·
attributes ·
operations ·
runstates ·
changes ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 189 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
defects ·
issues·
tasks·
events·
decisions ·
efforts·
risks·
metrics ·
Options:     true or false
Default:    true
Example:     prop_sec_testing_visible = "true"
prop_sec_<section>_expan
dedThis option is no longer used as of WebEA version 3.0.23.1690 (included in Pro
Cloud Server 3.0.23). Property sections are no longer displayed as
expandable/collapsible panels.
Defines whether or not a property section is expanded by default when the model is
opened.
The property view includes numerous sections that can be optionally expanded or
collapsed; these options set the default values for the model.
<section> can be one of:
info·
location ·
instances ·
relationships ·
taggedvalues ·
testing·
resourcealloc ·
attributes ·
operations ·
runstates ·
changes ·
defects ·
issues·
tasks·
events·
decisions ·
efforts·
risks·
metrics ·
Options:     true or false
Default:    false for all sections except 'info' and 'location', which are true
Example:     prop_sec_testing_expanded = "true"
default_diagram Defines the GUID of the diagram that should be automatically loaded when users
log onto the model. If this option is not defined or an empty value is specified,
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 190 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA assumes that no diagram should be loaded and displays the model root
instead. The GUID of any diagram can be obtained from WebEA by loading the
diagram properties.
Note: The entire GUID (including {}) must be used.
Example:     default_diagram = "{C89E174A-19B0-47c7-B4A8-8A98071CD838}"
default_main_layout Defines the default layout of container items for the current model. WebEA can
display child items of a container in one of three layouts. Either Icon view (the
default), Notes view (resembling the Enterprise Architect Specification Manager
view) or List view.
Options:     icon, notes or list
Default:        icon
Example:     default_main_layout = "list"
navigate_to_diagram Defines whether or not the first child Diagram of a Package element should be
automatically loaded, if the selected Package Element does not have any child
diagrams defined then the selected Package's details are loaded.
This option was added in WebEA version 3.0.23.1690, prior versions would simply
open the details of the selected Package.
Options:     true or false
Default:    true
Example:     navigate_to_diagram = "true"
show_discuss Defines whether or not discussions on Packages and elements should be displayed
within the WebEA interface.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Example:     show_discuss = "true"
Model update settings
This group of settings determine what insert/edit options are available to WebEA users.
Note: Within the Cloud Service it is possible to configure a model as 'Read-only'; this setting in the Cloud Service will
override any WebEA update setting, forcing them to false.
Option Description
add_discuss Defines whether or not new discussions on Packages and elements can be added to
the model. Note: This option is forced to false if 'show_discuss' has been set to
false.
Options:    true or false
Default:    false
Example:     add_discuss = "true"
add_objects Defines whether or not new objects can be added to the model.
Note: this option will be internally set and restricted to 'false" for Pro Cloud Server
Express installations.
Options:     true or false
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 191 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Default:    false
Example:     add_objects = "true"
add_diagrams Defines whether or not new diagrams can be added to the model.
Note: this option will be internally set and restricted to 'false" for Pro Cloud Server
Express installations.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Example:     add_diagrams = "true"
add_objecttype_<type> Defines whether or not elements of the given object type can be added to the model.
These options are forced to false if 'add_objects' has been set to false.
<type> can be one of:
package ·
review·
actor·
change ·
component ·
feature ·
issue·
node·
requirement ·
task·
usecase ·
Options:     true or false
Default:        false
Example:     add_objecttype_actor = "true"
add_object_features Defines whether or not element features can be added to the model.
Note: this option will be internally set and restricted to 'false" for Pro Cloud Server
Express installations.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Example:     add_object_features = "true"
add_objectfeature_<type> Defines whether or not element features of the given type can be added to the
model.
These options are forced to false if 'add_object_features' has been set to false.
<type> can be one of:
tests·
resources ·
changes ·
defects ·
issues·
tasks·
risks·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 192 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Examples:     add_objectfeature_changes = "true"
edit_objectfeature_resource
sDefines whether or not the details of element resource allocations can be edited in
the model.
Note: this option will be internally set and restricted to 'false" for Pro Cloud Server
Express installations.
Options:     true or false
Default:        false
Example:     edit_objectfeature_resources = "true"
edit_objectfeature_tests Defines whether or not the details of element tests can be edited in the model.
Note: this option will be internally set and restricted to 'false" for Pro Cloud Server
Express installations.
Options:     true or false
Default:        false
Example:     edit_objectfeature_tests = "true"
Model watchlist settings
The watchlist functionality allows users to quickly see a wide variety of objects that have changed recently in the model.
WebEA users can configure their personal preferences to control what sort of objects they are interested in 'watching'.
All watchlist settings are prefixed by 'wl_' and represent the default value for the model. However, once a user saves
their own watchlist settings the model defaults will no longer be used.
In order to persist the watchlist preferences across sessions, WebEA saves them in a browser cookie. If the user's browser
does not allow the saving of cookies, personal watchlist settings can not be persisted across sessions.
Option Description
cookie_retention Defines the period over which a WebEA user's set of Watch list options are stored.
The value is the number of days that the cookies will be retained for.
Options:    any positive integer value
Default:    365
Example:    cookie_retention = "180"
wl_period Defines the default activity period of the model watchlist. The value is a number of
days; for example, look for activity in the last 10 days.
Options:    any positive integer value
Default:    0
Example :    wl_period = "10"
wl_recent_discuss Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements that have
had discussions during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of review elements that
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 193 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
wl_recent_reviews have been added or modified during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_recent_diagram Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of added/modified
diagrams during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_recent_element Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of added/modified
elements during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_resalloc_active Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with active
resource allocations during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_resalloc_today Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
resource allocations ending during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_resalloc_overdue Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
resource allocations that fall overdue during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_test_recentpass Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tests
that passed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_test_recentfail Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tests
that failed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_test_recentdefer Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tests
that were deferred during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_test_recentnotchk Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tests
that were not checked during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tests
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 194 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
wl_test_notrun that were not run during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_change_verified Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
verified changes during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_change_requested Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
requested changes during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_change_completed Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
changes completed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_change_new Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with new
changes added during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_change_incomplete Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
incomplete changes during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_defect_verified Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
verified defects during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_defect_requested Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with defects
reported or 'requested' during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_defect_completed Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with defects
completed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_defect_new Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with defects
added during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 195 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
wl_defect_incomplete incomplete defects during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_issue_verified Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
verified issues during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_issue_requested Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with issues
reported or 'requested' during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_issue_completed Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with issues
completed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_issue_new Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with issues
added during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_issue_incomplete Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
incomplete issues during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_task_verified Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
verified tasks during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_task_requested Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
requested tasks during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_task_completed Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tasks
completed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_task_new Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with tasks
added during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 196 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
wl_task_incomplete incomplete tasks during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_event_requested Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
requested events during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_event_completed Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with events
completed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_event_high Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with events
set to high during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_decision_verified Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
verified decisions during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_decision_requested Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
requested decisions during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_decison_completed Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
decisions completed during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_decision_new Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
decisions added during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
wl_decision_incomplete Define whether or not the watch list should display a count of elements with
incomplete decisions during the activity period.
Options:     true or false
Default:    false
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 197 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
How to configure WebEA Localization
The physical text values of all labels and messages within WebEA are defined in a single file that is read when the web
pages are being built. This allows WebEA customers to tailor the content of web pages displayed to their users.
WebEA's default language is English. As pages are built on the server, the WebEA application will check whether there
is a defined localization for a string and use that. If a localized version of the string is not defined then WebEA will use
the default English value.
The WebEA localization definitions are saved in the file 'webea_strings.ini' in the '\includes\' folder. The localization file
is saved in plain text format with each localized string being defined on a separate line with the syntax:
  {default_english_string} = "{localized_string}"
Note that:
Localized string values are enclosed by double quotes ·
The configuration file supports comments; the semi-colon character starts a comment ·
The supplied 'webea_strings.ini' file includes a definition of all strings used within the WebEA application, therefore ·
there is no need to add any new lines to the file
For example, on the login page the first label is "Select Model" in the English version; however, a French user would
want to change this text to:
    Select Model = "Sélectionnez le modèle"
Replacements
The wording of some labels/messages within WebEA requires the names of items to be added to the string displayed.
Such replacements are denoted by the %s placeholder. The localized versions of these strings should also include the %s
placeholder in the appropriate position.
The other standard replacement that WebEA supports is the replacement of %NN% with a number. For example, in the
Watchlist when WebEA detects that elements have been modified recently, this message is used:
    %NN% recently modified element%S% = "%NN% recently modified element%S%"
%NN% will be replaced with a count of recently modified elements.
Plurals
Given the nature of the English language, some of the localized strings support the ability to display words in their plural
form. WebEA supports the special substitution of %S% which will replace, %S% with 's' when the supplied number is
greater than 1. Using our example, when a single element has been modified recently the message displayed on the
watchlist page is:
    1 recently modified element
However, when there are five recently modified elements, WebEA would generate the message:
    5 recently modified elements
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 198 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Advanced SSL
Adding trust to a Self-Signed Certificate
A self-signed SSL certificate can be signed with your own Certificate Authority (CA). This allows trust to be added to
clients to avoid security warnings. The instructions for adding a CA to a client vary by operating system or browser used.
See Add Trust with a Certificate Authority (CA) for instructions on generating a CA and using it to sign server
certificates.
WebEA uses PHP and cURL to communicate with a Pro Cloud Server. To enable PHP/curl to trust a new CA:
Add/edit 'curl.cainfo' in php.ini to point to either a single root CA certificate or a CA bundle file (this is multiple crt files
concatenated together).
[curl]
; A default value for the CURLOPT_CAINFO option. This is required to be an
; absolute path.
curl.cainfo="C:\xampp\php\MyCompanyCA.crt"
Restart Apache/PHP.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 199 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA User Guide
Sparx System's WebEA is an external interface to Enterprise Architect models through which users can review and
comment on a model, in real time via the web, on a range of mobile devices or a remote work station, without needing to
install Enterprise Architect. The reviewer can be anywhere in the world, and does not need to be in an office, just
somewhere where internet access is available. It is ideal for stakeholders and clients to see the work in which they are
invested, and to comment on and discuss aspects of the model.
WebEA models can be configured to allow users to update element notes, add element features (such as tests and
resource allocations) and even create Project Management elements (to record issues, changes and similar), or Use
Cases, Requirements and system components.
WebEA is the interface to the model, so although you are using your web browser, the data shown is the same as that
shown when you use Enterprise Architect. This means that all model updates occur in real time, so WebEA users can be
confident that they are seeing the latest version of the model structure.
How to Open WebEA
Open the web browser on your device and, in the address bar, type in the complete WebEA URL. Press the Enter key or
tap the Go key.
These are some examples of the complete URL that might be needed to open WebEA.
     http://demo.sparxpublic.com
In the case where the web server has the IP of 11.22.33.44 and has been configured to use the non-standard port of 800,
the complete URL would be:
     http://11.22.33.44:800
If the WebEA application files were placed in a sub-folder called 'WebEA' under the web server's root folder, then the
complete URL would be:
     http://11.22.33.44:800/WebEA/
If the entered URL is a valid, the WebEA Login page is shown, which will show all the models that are available.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 200 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Acknowledgements
WebEA incorporates certain components developed by third parties. Sparx Systems acknowledges the contribution made
to the WebEA product by these components.
jQuery v1.12.3 - jQuery Foundation ·
NicEdit ©2007-2008, Brian Kirchoff, under license from MIT ·
Date Picker for jQuery v5.1.1, Keith Wood, under license from MIT ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 201 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Login
WebEA websites are configured to allow access to one or more Enterprise Architect models, each of which can be
configured independently to only grant access to users with valid logon credentials. WebEA user validation supports two
forms of security: 1) an access code and 2) standard Enterprise Architect model security. These two validation methods
can be used independently or in combination in each model.
Prerequisites
Users of WebEA will need to be advised of their login credentials for each model, which will include:
An access code, or ·
A user ID and password, or ·
Possibly all three ·
This data will be provided to you by your Web Administrator or by the Project Manager responsible for the model.
Logging In
The first page that is displayed in WebEA is the 'Login' page, which lists the models available to you.
Select the model you want to open, then click or tap on either the Mobile, Tablet, or Desktop button. The button selected
determines whether the Browser and Properties View will be enabled by default.
If access to your model requires only an access code, then the 'Login' page prompts you for this.
Note:
The red asterix (*) denotes a mandatory field. ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 202 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Access Codes are not required for Windows Authentication or OpenID authentication. ·
If User Security has been applied to the model, the 'Login' page prompts you for your user ID and password.
If the model requires both an access code and a user id/password, the 'Login' page prompts for both together:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 203 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Single Sign On
This feature is available from Enterprise Architect Release 14.1 and Pro Cloud Server Release 3.0 build 23.
If the Enterprise Architect model has been configured to for Windows and or OpenID authentication then the 'Login'
page will show the relevant single sign buttons 'Login with OpenID' or 'Login with Windows ID'. Clicking the OpenID
login button will redirect the user to the OpenID Server Authentication page. After authenticating with OpenID the
browser will automatically return to WebEA and log the user in.
If the user is already authenticated with OpenID, the OpenID website might not be displayed, and the user will simply be
logged in.
If the model is configured to also allow manual login then both the Single Sign On buttons and manual login fields will
be visible on the Login page. If the option 'Restrict access to Windows & OpenID users only' is checked then the manual
login fields will not be available.
See:
Single Sign-On (SSO) Options ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 204 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If you do not have the authorization data, click or tap on the Back button to go back and select another model.
Otherwise, type in your access code and/or user ID and password, and click on the Login button.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 205 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA's layout
Having logged on to a model in WebEA, and depending on how the model has been configured to display on opening,
you will be initially shown the model root icons; a simple specification list of the model root nodes; a list showing the
root node names, types and last modification date; or a default diagram (if one is defined for the model). From this point
you can start navigating the model by selecting objects or links, review the organization and contents of the model
elements, and read and add to discussions or reviews of particular structures.
Note: WebEA only supports single click when using a PC, or single touch when using a touch-enabled device.
These images show the WebEA screen when the root node of the example model is displayed in Icon and List views.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 206 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The WebEA view can be broken into four sections: heading, navigation bar, content area and status bar.
Note: In order to support small screen devices, some layout sections move or merge with others to minimize the amount
of screen real estate needed. For example, the heading section merges with the Navigation bar when the screen height
goes below 400 pixels.
Heading
WebEA's heading area displays the application logo in the top right corner, the name of the currently opened model, a
search icon and a 'hamburger' icon. The search and 'hamburger' icons contain further options that are accessible when
selected.
Search
The search icon provides access to the search functionality offered by WebEA. The functionality includes a number of
standard searches, the Watchlist and the custom search.
Icon Description
Goto item
Select to display the 'Goto WebEA item' dialog, into which you paste (Ctrl+V) a
WebEA item's unique ID that you have copied earlier, using the 'Direct Link' icon
in the page Navigation Bar (see the Navigation Bar table in this topic). Click on the
Go button to load the details of the specified object.
Reviews
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 207 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Select to display a list of all recently modified Review elements.
Note: The number of days that are considered 'recent' is defined as a configuration
option for the model.
Discussions
Select to display a list of all elements to which a Discussion item has been recently
added.
Diagrams
Select to display a list of all recently modified diagrams.
Elements
Select to display a list of all recently modified elements (new Discussion items are
not regarded as modifications to the element).
Watchlist
Select to display the 'Watchlist summary'. The Watch List facility in WebEA helps
you to quickly identify recent activity in the model.
Matrix
Select to display the 'Matrix Profiles' page, which helps you to select any matrix
profile defined in the model and to display the associated Relationship Matrix.
Custom search
Select to display the 'Custom Search' dialog. WebEA provides a facility that
enables you to search through the model for a specific item or group of items that
have certain characteristics.
Hamburger
The hamburger icon provides access to these options:
Icon Description
Browser
Choose this option if you prefer to display a 'context browser' view on the left side
of the main content area. This area will contain the currently selected object and a
list of all of its child objects. Between the object name and the name of the first
child object is a 
  icon; clicking on this icon refreshes the display to show the
next-highest level of the hierarchy.
Note: This option is disabled when the screen is less than 800 pixels in width.
Properties
Choose this option to display the 'Properties View' on the right side of the main
content area.
When viewing a diagram the Properties View allows you to access properties of an
element without navigating away from the diagram.
When viewing an element, the Properties View allows you to have a Split View of
the element's properties, displaying one feature in the Main View while also
showing another in the Properties View (for example, you could add Discussions in
the Main View while referring to the element's notes in the Properties View).
Note: This option is disabled when the screen is less than 800 pixels in width.
Note: By enabling this option, links in the Diagram View are changed to populate
the Properties View instead of navigating to the selected object. It is important to
realize that selecting objects in the Diagram View while the Properties View is
displayed will not affect the navigation history, so you can select as many objects
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 208 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
as you need in the current view and see their properties without navigating away
from the current diagram.
Icon view
Choose this option if you prefer the display of the model content to be in icon
format (as illustrated at the start of this topic).
List view
Choose this option if you prefer the display of the model content to be in list format
(as illustrated at the start of this topic).
Notes view
Choose this option to display the model content to be displayed as a list of element
names and notes (if present). This is similar to the Enterprise Architect
Specification Manager display.
Logout
Choose this option if you want to disconnect from the current model. After the
logout process has run, the 'Login' dialog automatically displays.
Navigation Bar
The Navigation bar provides information and buttons that assist in navigating an Enterprise Architect model. The various
buttons available in the Navigation bar are explained in this table.
Icon Description
Home
Click on this button to return focus to the 'home' object for the current model. The
home object is either the model's default diagram (if defined in the configuration
file) or the model root Package.
Object Path
Click on this button to display the complete path of parent nodes, Views, Packages
and elements for the current object, all the way to the model's root node.
You can click on any item in the list (except for the last one, which is the current
object) and navigate directly to that object.
Note: When viewing the root node there will be only one entry, which is not
selectable.
Current object
This is a read-only text field that displays the name and object type (displayed as an
image) of the current object.
Refresh
Click on this button to refresh the current view. For example, if you are currently
viewing a diagram and a user in Enterprise Architect has made changes to it since
you opened it, simply click the Refresh button; WebEA will display the newly
updated diagram.
Direct Link
Click on this button to display the 'Link to WebEA item' dialog, which shows the
current item's unique ID and full URL. You can highlight the ID and press Ctrl+C
to copy it, then at a later point use it in the 'Goto WebEA item' dialog to return
directly to that page, as described in the Search table earlier.
Alternatively, you can copy the full URL and send it to another user if you want
them look at a particular item.
Properties
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 209 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Click on this button to display the properties of the currently opened Package or
diagram.
Note: This button is only enabled when properties can be shown for the current
item.
Content Area
WebEA's content area adjusts and adapts to display a custom layout for the currently selected item, depending on its
type. For example, when a diagram is selected the content area consists entirely of the diagram image, but when a
Package is selected the content area displays a view of child objects in that Package.
See the Content Area section later in this guide for more details.
Status bar
The WebEA Status bar is displayed at the very bottom of the page, and is an area reserved for the display of information
about the application. However, typically it will only consist of a single 'A' button in the right corner which, when
clicked or tapped, will display the 'WebEA About' screen.
Review element
If you have joined a review, the name of the Review element will display in the Status bar on the left side of the About
button, as shown in the image.
iOS Scrolling
When accessing WebEA via iPad or iPhone the status bar will display "iPad Diagram Scrolling: Off" or "iPhone
Diagram Scrolling: Off" respectively. Touch this text to toggle the option On/Off.
Typically images can be scrolled on mobile devices by touching/dragging on the image, however iOS browsers will not
scroll if you are touching a clickable area (such as an element on a diagram). This could make scrolling difficult on
diagrams which are densely populated with clickable elements.
iPad/iPhone Diagram Scrolling: On
Diagram elements will not be selectable, allowing you to scroll by touching/dragging anywhere on the diagram.
iPad/iPhone Diagram Scrolling: Off
Diagram elements will be selectable, however to drag the diagram image you will need to ensure you are not touching a
selectable element.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 210 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Content Area
The main content area of WebEA consists of:
- The Main View in the center. This is used for displaying such things as diagrams and element properties
- Optionally, the Browser on the left. This is used to assist in navigating the model.
- Optionally, the Properties View on the right. This allows you to view properties of an element while simultaneously
viewing something else (such as a diagram) in the main view.
Details
Main View The Main View typically displays these types of content:
- A Diagram Image
- The Properties of an element
- A list of objects that are contained in a specific Package (or objects that are
children of a specific element). This object list is only accessible when the Browser
is not displayed (as the Browser functions as an alternative).
Browser The Browser assists with Navigation, and provides context for the object which is
currently displayed in the Main View
Properties View The Properties View displays properties of a selected object. When viewing a
Diagram, it allows you to view some properties of an element without navigating
away from the diagram.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 211 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Main View - Object List
In Main View's Object List the child objects of a container are represented in one of three viewing styles: Icon, List or
Notes view.
It is possible to define a default viewing style for a model, in the configuration file. However, you can also change the
style for the current session using the menu items in the 'Hamburger' menu; see the WebEA's Layout Help topic.
Icon View
In Icon view, each object is represented by an image and object name. As an example, a root node with the name 'ASA
Finance' would be represented by:
A View object with the name 'Class Model' would be represented by:
List View
In List view each object is represented as a row in a table, which includes columns for name, type, author and modified
date. The earlier examples would be represented in List view like this:
Notes View
In Notes view each object is represented by the object name and any text from the object's 'Notes' field.
Display Order
In Object View, objects are displayed in the predefined order: Packages, diagrams and elements; if there are multiples of
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 212 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
any object type then they will be sorted in alphabetical order. This is different to Enterprise Architect's behavior, which
can allow elements to be manually ordered.
As an example:
Additional Symbols
While navigating the model structure with WebEA you might see a number of symbols applied to the object images.
Each symbol has a meaning: the 
  symbol indicates that the object contains children, whilst the 
 symbol indicates
the object is locked to the current user.
The action taken when an item is selected is dependent on the object type of the item.
For Packages, the default action is to navigate down one level of the Project Browser and display the child objects ·
contained within that Package
For diagrams the default action is to open the diagram image ·
For elements the default action is to display the Properties for the selected element ·
To open the properties of a Package while viewing it in the Object View, click on the 
  button in the Navigation bar.
If you navigate to a Package that does not have children, the message 'No child element(s)' will be displayed.
Adding New Elements
If the model has been configured to allow the addition of elements and the current user has the required permissions, the
 icon will be shown as the last element of a Package's object view. For more details see the Object Creation in
WebEA Help topic.
Notes
WebEA's WebEA - Browser acts as an alternative to the Object List. If the WebEA Browser is displayed then the ·
Object List is not accessible.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 213 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Main View - Diagram
When a diagram is selected, the Main View content area displays the entire diagram as a single image. As an example,
this is the default diagram in the EAExample model:
Objects on the diagram are selectable and, based on the object type and if the 'Properties View' is visible, will behave
slightly differently.
The behavior when the 'Properties View' is not visible:
Packages: opens the select Package in the Object View mode ·
Diagrams: opens the selected diagram image ·
Elements: opens the selected element in the Main View ·
Hyperlinks to external URLs: navigates away from WebEA and loads the external URL ·
The behavior when the 'Properties View' is visible:
Packages: main properties are displayed in the 'Properties View' ·
Diagrams: main properties are displayed in the 'Properties View' ·
Elements: main properties are displayed in the 'Properties View' ·
panel·
Hyperlinks: navigate to link target ·
Notes
To open the properties of a diagram while viewing the diagram image click the 
  button in the Navigation bar ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 214 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 215 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Main View - Object Properties
When selecting an element in WebEA its properties are displayed in the Main View. The Main View Properties consist
of a section at the top with common element properties, followed by a row of feature buttons (Notes, Relationships, etc)
which can be used to access specific features. By default the Notes are displayed.
Common Properties
The common properties section displays an image representing the object's type, and its name, type and stereotype. This
is followed by general information about the object, such as author, time and date created and last modified, the version,
phase and status. Note, the Properties View can also be enabled and displayed alongside the Main View's Object
Properties. In this case the author, version, and other characteristics will only be displayed in the Properties View.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 216 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the model has been configured to allow it, there will be an element 'Hamburger' icon that allows the creation of ·
object features; see the Object Creation in WebEA Help topic for further details
If the element has a regular Linked Document applied, a line with 'Linked Document' and an Open button will be ·
displayed immediately under the object's name and type fields; clicking on the Open button will display the contents
of the Linked Document
If the element has an encrypted Linked Document applied, in addition to the 'Linked Document' label and Open ·
button a password textbox displays; if you enter the correct password and click or tap on the Open button the
contents of the encrypted document will be displayed
If the element has a stored Document applied, a Download button (along with the label 'Stored Document') will be ·
displayed; clicking on the Download button will save the document to the user's machine where they can use the
appropriate application to view it
If the element has an image asset applied, a Download button (along with the label 'Image Asset') will be displayed; ·
clicking on the Download button will save the image to the user's machine where they can use the appropriate
application to view it
Selectable Features
After the Common Properties a number of buttons are displayed that allow you to view other features of the object
(including Location, Tagged Values, Attributes and Operations). By default, the element Notes will be selected and
displayed. Clicking on one of the other buttons will display the relevant details.
Buttons are available for displaying these features:
Notes: the notes of the current object ·
Location: information relating to the current object's parent, any diagrams that the element appears on, and a list of ·
instances that the element is a classifier of
Tagged Values: a list of defined Tagged Values for the current object ·
Relationships: a list of incoming and outgoing connections for the current object; clicking on the connector type will ·
display the connector's properties
Attributes: a list of all defined attributes for the current object ·
Operations: a list of all defined operations for the current object ·
Requirements: a list of all defined internal requirements (responsibilities) for the current object ·
Constraints: a list of all defined constraints for the current object ·
Scenarios: a list of all defined scenarios for the current object ·
Tests: a list of all defined tests for the current object. Selecting a test from the list will display more information. If ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 217 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
you have the required permissions and the model has been configured correctly, clicking or tapping the pencil icon
will allow you to edit the details of the selected test
Resources: a list of all defined Resource Allocations for the current object. Selecting a resource from the list will ·
display more information. If you have the required permissions and the model has been configured correctly,
clicking or tapping the 'Pencil' icon will allow you to edit the details of the selected resource allocation
Changes: a list of all defined changes for the current object. Selecting a change from the list will display more ·
information.
Defects: a list of all defined defects for the current object. Selecting a defect from the list will display more ·
information.
Issues: a list of all defined issues for the current object. Selecting an issue from the list will display more ·
information.
Tasks: a list of all defined tasks for the current object. Selecting a task from the list will display more information. ·
Events: a list of all defined events for the current object. Selecting an event from the list will display more ·
information.
Decisions: a list of all defined decisions for the current object. Selecting a decision from the list will display more ·
information.
Effort: a list of all defined effort items for the current object ·
Risks: a list of all defined risks for the current object ·
Metrics: a list of all defined metrics for the current object ·
Discussions: a list of all formal review discussions and informal discussions on the element; if the current model has ·
been configured to allow it, you can contribute to discussions on the current object - for further information on these
facilities, see the Reviews in WebEA and Discussions in WebEA Help topics
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 218 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA - Browser
The WebEA 'Browser' displays a context sensitive view of a Package or Element and its children. It can be enabled via
the 'Browser' option in the main 'Hamburger' menu which is located in the upper right corner of WebEA. When enabled,
the Browser displays on the left side of WebEA's Main View.
If the currently selected object is a Package, or an element with children, then the Browser displays the object at the
parent level, and the children below it.
If the currently selected object is a diagram or an element without children, then the Browser displays the object's parent,
then its children (which include the current object and its siblings)
If the currently selected object is not the root, then the second item in the Browser is an up arrow, allowing navigation to
the next level up. Selecting an object in the 'Browser' panel will cause WebEA to navigate to that object.
Notes
The Browser panel is only visible if the screen is greater than 800 pixels wide. ·
The Browser acts as an alternative to viewing the object list in WebEA's Main View. When the Browser is enabled ·
the Main View - Object List is not accessible.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 219 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA - Properties View
The WebEA 'Properties View' displays a context sensitive view of a Package or element and its children. It can be
enabled via the 'Properties' option in the main 'Hamburger' menu which is located in the upper right corner of WebEA.
When enabled, the Properties View displays on the right side of WebEA's Main View.
The 'Properties View' displays the principle property details of the object currently selected in the main content area,
these being the name, type, notes, creation and modification dates, version and location details.
By default, the 'Properties View' will also display the element Notes; however, you can select a different feature to
display in this location by using the 'Select Feature' Hamburger menu (to the right of the 'Notes' heading).
The main purpose of the 'Properties View' is to allow users to quickly and easily see details of elements without
navigating away from a diagram.
The 'Properties View' is also displayed while viewing the Full Properties of an object in WebEA's Main View. This
allows you to access one feature of the element (such as Notes) in the 'Properties View' while also accessing another
(such as Discussions) in the Main View.
Navigation Buttons
When appropriate, the Properties View will also include navigation buttons that allow you to either display the object's
full properties in WebEA's Main View, or view the element/Package's children.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 220 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Button Description
This can be used to navigate to the object, showing its full properties in the Main
View.
If you have selected a Package or an Element with children, and the Browser is not
currently enabled then an additional icon is displayed. This allows you to view the
object's children in the object list/icon view.
Navigation Element Behavior
Within Enterprise Architect it is possible to define a number of different element types that make it easier to navigate
your model (Hyperlinks, Navigation Cells, etc). By default selecting one of these objects in WebEA will navigate
directly to the target (instead of displaying its properties in the Properties View).
If necessary, you can change this behavior using the 'How to configure WebEA models' configuration option.
Notes
The Properties View is only visible if the screen is greater than 800 pixels wide. ·
Selecting elements on a diagram while the Properties View is shown will not effect the browsing history. ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 221 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Object Creation in WebEA
Depending on how the current model has been configured in the WebEA configuration file and your security access to
the model, you might have the ability to create a range of objects in the model through WebEA. These objects include:
Packages and diagrams; elements such as Use Cases, Requirements, Components, Changes and Issues; and features of
elements such as Tests, Decisions, Defects and Events. You can therefore define additional scope or problems that have
arisen, directly in the model, with precision and in detail, adding to the accuracy and quality of the solution that the
model represents.
The Project Manager responsible for the model should guide you in how to create objects and in the purpose of you
doing so.
In addition to adding new elements you might also be able to edit the Notes of any object regardless of type, and the
details of element Tests and Resource Allocations for any element in the model, whether you have created it or not. See
the Edit Objects Help topic.
Note: the ability to Create objects is only possible in the Premium (Small Business, Team and Enterprise) editions of the
Pro Cloud Server.
Adding Objects
You can quickly establish if you have the ability to create objects in WebEA by checking the WebEA - Browser or the
Main View - Object List.
If you are able to create objects then the final item in the list will be a '<new>' button.
For example:
Click on this button to display the 'Add Object' page.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 222 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Field Description
Element type Click on the drop-down arrow and select the type of object to create. Depending on
your security permissions and the model's options, you can create some or all of
these objects:
Package ·
Diagram ·
Review ·
Actor·
Change ·
Component ·
Feature ·
Issue·
Node·
Requirement ·
Task·
Use Case ·
Technology This is an optional field that is only visible when 'Diagram' is selected as the
element type. It allows the selection of a Technology that provides an additional set
of diagram types.
Diagram Type This is an optional field that is only visible when 'Diagram' is selected as the
element type. Click on the drop-down arrow and select the type of diagram to
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 223 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
create.
Name Type in an appropriate name for the object, preferably giving some indication of its
purpose or function.
Notes Type in a more detailed description of the element, such as why you are creating it
and what other elements it might be associated with.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
Add Click on this button to add the new object to the Package in which you are creating
it. This message displays:
    Object added
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new object in this Package, or ·
Click on the 
  icon and select the Package line to return to the 'Hierarchy' ·
view of the Package, now containing the new element
Adding Element Features
You can, again, quickly establish if you have the ability to create element features in WebEA, by displaying the
Properties of an element in WebEA's Main View - Object Properties; if the 
  icon displays in the right corner of the
element name/notes panel, you can add element features.
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add a feature, and click on the 
  icon. A menu displays
offering options to add to the element each feature that you have the access permissions to create. These features might
include:
Other Objects ·
Tests·
Resources ·
Changes ·
Defects ·
Issues·
Tasks, or ·
Risks·
Select the appropriate option; a dialog displays in which you complete the fields to define the feature for the element.
Each type of feature has a different dialog; refer to these topics for the details appropriate to each dialog.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 224 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Test Records ·
Add Resource Records ·
Add Change Requests ·
Add a Defect ·
Add an Issue Notification ·
Add a Task ·
Add a Risk ·
Notes
As suggested in the Adding Element Features section, you can also add an object to a Package or to another object ·
within the Main View's Object Properties page; click on the 'Hamburger' icon and select the 'Add Object' option, and
complete the 'Add Object' page as described at the start of this topic
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 225 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Test Records
Within an element, you can create a record for each Test that you want to add to the element.
Add a Test
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the Test record, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add Test' option. The 'Add Test to <element
name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Test name Type an appropriate and meaningful name for the Test.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 226 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Class Type Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate test group; that is:
Unit·
Integration ·
System·
Acceptance ·
Scenario, or ·
Inspection ·
Type Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate test type; that is:
Load·
Regression or ·
Standard ·
Status Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate test status; that is:
Not Run (the most likely value for a new record from you) ·
Pass·
Fail·
Deferred or ·
Cancelled ·
Run by If the test has been run, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the
person who ran it.
Last Run If the test has been run, click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the
test was most recently run.
Checked by If the test has been run, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the
person who checked the test execution and results.
Description Type in a description of the test, what it is intended to show and why it is
necessary.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
Input Type a description of what actions or parameters are required as input to this test.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Acceptance Criteria Type a description of what criteria must be satisfied to indicate that the test has
passed.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 227 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Results Type a description of the expected and/or actual results of this test.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the Test record on the selected
element.
This message is displayed:
    Test <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new Test on this element, or ·
Click on the browser's Back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Testing' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 228 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Resource Records
Within an element, you can create a record for each Resource that you want to add to the element.
Add a Resource
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the Resource record, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add resource' option. The 'Add resource
allocation to <element name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Resource Click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the person to be allocated as
the resource.
Role Click on the drop-down arrow and select the role of the resource in this work; for
example:
Application Analyst ·
Business Analyst ·
C++ Programmer ·
Project Manager ·
Start date Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the resource is expected to
start the assigned work.
Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the resource is expected to
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 229 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
End date complete the assigned work.
% Complete Click on the up and down arrows to change the field value to the percentage
completion of work that the resource has achieved.
Description Type in a description of the resource allocation - what the work is, why this (kind
of) resource is required to do it, and any criteria that must be satisfied.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the Resource Allocation record
on the selected element.
This message is displayed:
    Resource allocation for <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new Resource Allocation on ·
this element, or
Click on the browser's back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Resource
Allocation' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 230 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Change Requests
Within an element, you can create a record for each Change Request that you want to add to the element.
Add a Change Request
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the Change Request, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add change' option. The 'Add change to
<element name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Name Type an appropriate and meaningful name for the requested change.
Status Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate request status; that is:
New·
Verified, or ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 231 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Complete ·
Priority Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate priority value; that is:
High·
Medium, or ·
Low·
Requested by Click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the person requesting the
change.
Requested on Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the request was made.
Completed by If the change has been completed, click on the drop-down arrow and select the
name of the person who completed it.
Completed on Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the requested change was
completed.
Version Type in a version number or letter to indicate any evolution of the same change.
Generally, '1.0' indicates the first instance of a change.
Description Type in a description of the change, what it is intended to be and why it is
necessary.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
History If there is any background to this change, such as previous versions, document them
here (you might copy the 'Description' from the last version or iteration of this
change, for example). It is recommended that you include a date stamp and user
initials in the entry.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the change request on the
selected element.
This message is displayed:
    Change <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new change request on this ·
element, or
Click on the browser's back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Changes' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 232 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 233 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add a Defect
Within an element, you can create a record for each defect that you want to add to the element.
Add a Defect Record
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the defect record, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add defect' option. The 'Add defect to
<element name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Name Type an appropriate and meaningful name for the defect.
Status Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate record status; that is:
New·
Verified, or ·
Complete ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 234 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Priority Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate priority value; that is:
High·
Medium, or ·
Low·
Reported by Click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the person reporting the
defect.
Reported on Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the record was made.
Resolved by If the defect has been resolved, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name
of the person who resolved it.
Resolved on Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the recorded defect was
fixed.
Version Type in a version number or letter to indicate any evolution of the same defect.
Generally, '1.0' indicates the first instance of a defect.
Description Type in a description of the defect, what it is, what the solution might be, and why
it is a problem.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
History If there is any background to this defect, such as previous occurrences, document
them here (you might copy the 'Description' from the last version or iteration of this
defect record, for example). It is recommended that you include a date stamp and
user initials in the entry.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the defect record on the
selected element.
This message is displayed:
    Defect <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new defect record on this ·
element, or
Click on the browser's back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Defects' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 235 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add an Issue Notification
Within an element, you can create a record for each issue notification that you want to add to the element.
Add an Issue
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the issue notification, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add issue' option. The 'Add issue to <element
name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Name Type an appropriate and meaningful name for the reported issue.
Status Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate issue status; that is:
New·
Verified, or ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 236 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Complete ·
Priority Defaults to 'High'. If necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select the
appropriate priority value; that is:
Medium, or ·
Low·
Raised by Defaults to the first name in the list of project users. If necessary, click on the
drop-down arrow and select the name of the person raising the issue.
Raised on Defaults to today's date. If necessary, click on the calendar icon and select the
actual date on which the issue was raised.
Completed by If the issue has been resolved, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of
the person who resolved it.
Completed on Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the issue was resolved.
Version Type in a version number or letter to indicate any evolution of the same issue.
Defaults to '1.0', indicating the first instance of an issue.
Description Type in a description of the issue, what it is, what the solution might be, and why it
is a problem.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
History If there is any background to this issue, such as previous occurrences, document
them here (you might copy the 'Description' from the last version or iteration of this
issue, for example). It is recommended that you include a date stamp and user
initials in the entry.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the issue report on the selected
element.
This message is displayed:
    Issue <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new issue on this element, or ·
Click on the browser's back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Issues' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 237 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 238 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add a Task
Within an element, you can create a record for each task that you want to add to the element.
Add a Task Record
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the task record, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add task' option. The 'Add task to <element
name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Name Type an appropriate and meaningful name for the new task.
Status Click on the drop-down arrow and select the appropriate task status; that is:
New·
Verified, or ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 239 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Complete ·
Priority Defaults to 'High'. If necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select the
appropriate priority value; that is:
Medium, or ·
Low·
Requested by Click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the person requesting the
task. This defaults to the name selected for the previous record.
Reported on Defaults to today's date. If necessary, click on the calendar icon and select the
correct date on which the request was made.
Completed by If the task has been completed, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name
of the person who completed it.
Completed on Click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the task was completed.
Version Type in a version number or letter to indicate any evolution of the same task.
Defaults to '1.0', indicating the first instance of a task.
Description Type in a description of the task, what it is, what the objective might be, and why it
is a required.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
History If there is any background to this task, such as previous occurences, document them
here (you might copy the 'Description' from the last version or iteration of this task,
for example). It is recommended that you include a date stamp and user initials in
the entry.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the task record on the selected
element.
This message is displayed:
    Task <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new task request on this ·
element, or
Click on the browser's Back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Tasks' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 240 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 241 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add a Risk
A Risk is a condition that could cause the disruption, loss or compromise of a system. It can refer to either technical or
business risks.
Within an element, you can create a record for each risk that you want to record against the element.
Add a Risk Record
Display the Properties of the element to which you want to add the risk record, and click on the 
  icon. A menu
displays offering options to add various features to the element. Select the 'Add risk' option. The 'Add risk to <element
name>' dialog displays.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Name Type an appropriate and meaningful name for the new risk.
Type Type in the risk type.
Weight Defaults to 1. Click on the up and down arrows to set a different weighting on the
risk. There is no limit to the value that you can set, but within Enterprise Architect
the usual value is a small number between, say, 1.0 (normal) and 5.0 (heavily
weighted).
Description Type in a description of the risk, what it is and what the mitigation might be.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar. These
are:
Bold·
Italic·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 242 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Underline ·
Numbered list ·
Bulleted list ·
Superscript text ·
Subscript text ·
Set color of selected text ·
Add Click on this button to submit the details and create the risk record on the selected
element.
This message is displayed:
   Risk <name> was successfully added to <element name>.
Either:
Work through the fields again, defining another new risk on this element, or ·
Click on the browser's back button to return to the 'Properties' view of the ·
element, which will be refreshed to show the new record in the 'Risks' panel
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 243 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Edit Objects
Within any model in which you have the security permissions to create elements, you can also edit the Notes, Resource
Allocation and Testing details of any object in which they occur. On the right of the item field for these three properties
you will see a 
  icon, which indicates that you have the ability to edit that property.
Note: the ability to Edit objects is only possible in the Premium (Small Business, Team and Enterprise) editions of the
Pro Cloud Server.
Edit Notes
To edit the notes of an object, click on the 
  icon for the field. The 'Edit note for <object type>' page displays.
You can add, delete and change text, and use the formatting tools in the Notes toolbar; that is, for a selected text string,
add:
Bold·
Italic·
Underline ·
Numbered List ·
Bulleted List ·
Superscript ·
Subscript ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 244 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Text color ·
You can also right-click on the selected text and select options from the browser context menu to:
Undo the last change ·
Move (cut) the text string into the buffer for pasting ·
Copy the text string into the buffer for pasting ·
Paste text from the buffer into the 'Notes' field ·
Delete the selected text ·
Select all the text in the 'Notes' field ·
Search for the selected text string on the internet ·
Turn spell-checking on and off (if on, possibly misspelt text is underlined in red) ·
Add a different language dictionary to check spelling against (this would probably have been done already for your ·
web browser)
Whilst you can edit the text of a hyperlink and delete the hyperlink, you cannot change the linked object or add a new
hyperlink. The browser context menu also provides options for working with the hyperlink, but the WebEA interface
cannot support these functions.
When you have finished editing the text, click on the Save button. A confirmation message briefly displays and you are
returned to the object 'Properties' view.
Edit Tests
The tests assigned to an element support a range of situations including user acceptance and scenario. You could be
asked to define or perform tests on parts of a model of relevance to you as a customer or user, or you might want to add
information obtained from other people you have asked to perform an evaluation. Therefore, you might need to edit test
records to update them with your information.
To edit a test record, display the appropriate element in WebEA's Main View, click the feature button to display 'Tests'
then select the appropriate test from the list.
Once the test is displayed click on the 
  icon. The 'Edit Test for <element name>' page displays.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 245 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Edit Test for <<element name>> page
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Test name If necessary, type a new name for the Test.
Class type In necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select a different test group for the
test; that is:
Unit·
Integration ·
System·
Acceptance ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 246 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Scenario, or ·
Inspection ·
Type If necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select a new test type; that is:
Load·
Regression or ·
Standard ·
Status If necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select a new test status; that is:
Not Run ·
Pass·
Fail·
Deferred or ·
Cancelled ·
Run by If the test has been run, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the
person who ran it.
Last Run If the test has been run, click on the calendar icon and select the date on which the
test was most recently run.
Checked by If the test has been run, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the
person who checked the test execution and results.
Description Type in a description of the test, what it was intended to show and - if the test has
been run - what the test situation and results were.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar, as
described in the Edit Notes section.
Input Type a description of what actions or parameters are or were required as input to
this test.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar, as
described in the Edit Notes section.
Acceptance Criteria Type a description of what criteria must be or were satisfied to indicate that the test
has passed.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Results Type a description of the expected and/or actual results of this test.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar.
Save Click on this button to submit the details and update the Test record on the selected
element.
A confirmation message briefly displays and you are returned to the object
'Properties' view
Edit Resource Allocation
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 247 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The resources allocated to an element can include reviewers in various roles, and you might be allocated as a resource
yourself. Alternatively, you could have allocated another person as a reviewer. Therefore, you might need to edit a
resource allocation to record either your own progress in a review, or the progress of the resource you have allocated.
To edit the resource allocation, display the appropriate element in WebEA's Main View, click the feature button to
display 'Resources' then select the appropriate test from the list.
Once the resource is displayed click on the 
  icon. The 'Edit resource allocation for <element name>' page displays.
Edit Resource Allocation for <element name> page
Notice that this page has a few more fields than the initial 'Add resource allocation ...' page.
Mandatory fields on the dialog are indicated by a red asterisk (*).
Complete the fields as directed here.
Field Action
Resource If necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of a different person
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 248 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
to be allocated as the resource.
Role If necessary, click on the drop-down arrow and select a different role for the
resource in this work.
Start Date If necessary, click on the calendar icon and select a different date on which the
resource started or is expected to start the assigned work.
End Date If necessary, click on the calendar icon and select a different date on which the
resource completed or is expected to complete the assigned work.
% Complete Click on the up and down arrows to change the field value to the percentage
completion of work that the resource has achieved.
Expected Type in the number of whole time units the task is expected to take. The value must
be an integer; you cannot record part units.
The unit of time you use will be identified by the Project Manager, and depends on
the granularity of the work being recorded. Most tasks are completed in a number
of hours or a number of days; use the smallest practical unit that you can record as a
whole number, and use the same units for the expected, allocated and actual times.
Allocated Type in the number of whole time units the task can be spread over. For example,
you might expect the task to take 2 days of work performed at any point over a
period of 5 days.
Actual If the task is 100% complete, type in the number of whole time units it actually
took.
Description If necessary, edit the description of the resource allocation, perhaps to explain the
changes you have made to earlier fields.
You can format this text using the facilities provided in the Notes toolbar, as
explained in the Edit Notes section.
Before changing the text, you might want to copy it to paste into the 'History' field
for editing there.
History Optionally, paste or type in an explanation of what has previously taken place with
this Resource Allocation. You can also format this text, using the facilities in the
Notes toolbar.
Save Click on this button to submit the details and update the Resource Allocation record
on the selected element.
A confirmation message briefly displays and you are returned to the object
'Properties' view.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 249 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Reviews in WebEA
Review elements are a convenient way for groups of users to collaboratively discuss one or more model objects and
capture those discussions as a formal review. A Review element is a custom element that captures all discussions that
you participate in over a period of time. That period begins when you select to 'join' the review, and ends either when
you select to leave the review, or when you log out of the current model. You can also return to the review in a
subsequent work session and your continuing discussions are also captured. The Review element would typically have a
start and end date set to define the duration of the review.
When a Review element is created, a child diagram is also created, automatically. Both Enterprise Architect and WebEA
consider any element added to this diagram as requiring comment during the Review. When the properties of the Review
element are loaded in WebEA the 'Objects in Review' section will contain a list of all elements that have already been
commented on or have been added to the Review diagram. This list provides a convenient way to quickly navigate to
each element in the Review.
When the properties of a Review element are loaded in WebEA's Main View, the default feature which is displayed is a
Summary of the Review. This includes the status, start and end dates, number of elements discussed and yet to be
discussed, and a break down of review topics based on priority and status, as illustrated here:
The Summary is followed by 'Review Diagrams' and 'Objects in Review' sections.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 250 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The 'Review Diagrams' section provides links to the diagram which are associated with the review (I.e. those which are
children of the Review Element).
The 'Objects in Review' section displays a list of elements to be discussed during the review. Elements that have not yet
been discussed are presented first in the list, followed by elements that have been commented on, showing each review
topic. The name of the object acts as a hyperlink to that object.
Locating Reviews
There are a number of ways in which to locate existing Review elements to join, or to switch to your active review (the
review that you have already joined).
To check on recent Review elements available in the model, click on the 'Search' icon in the WebEA header and select
the 'Reviews' option. This conducts a search for recent Review elements and lists them in the 'Search Results' view, with
the most recently changed element at the top of the list.
You can click on the name of a Review in the list to load the details of the selected Review element, and then join or
leave the Review as appropriate.
The name of your active Review is displayed in the WebEA's Status bar, and you can click on the name (in the Status
bar) to load the details of the active Review element.
Join a Review
While the property details of a Review element are loaded, the Join Review button will be enabled.
Clicking on this button will join you to the review and link your discussions to the Review element. The display will
automatically be adjusted to the change of state. These changes include:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 251 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The addition of the joined Review element's name to the status bar ·
The 'Review' section filtering elements to the current Review element only ·
The 'Discussion' section's update/add actions being disabled ·
The Join Review button being disabled, and the Leave Review button being enabled ·
The Join Review button might be disabled, for these reasons:
You are already joined to a review on a different Review element ·
The loaded Review is closed ·
The Join Review button and Leave Review button are only visible on Review elements when the 'participate_in_review'
configuration option is set to true for the current model. See the How to configure WebEA models Help topic for more
information.
Add topics to a Review
When you have opened and read through the contents of a Review element, you can add your own review topics or
respond to existing points. To do this you click on the name of the object you want to comment on, then select the
'Discussions' feature button.
Note, whilst you are joined to a review - the contents of the panel are filtered to show only the review comments for that
review.
Add a Review Topic
To create a review topic on a new point, simply type into the 'Create Review Topic' field. When you have finished typing
your message, submit it by clicking on this button: 
Note: WebEA does not support editing (or deleting) review comments, therefore you should take care to type messages
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 252 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
in clearly the first time, and double check before submitting.
Depending on how the WebEA model is configured, you might connect to it using your personal user ID, or as a single
generic User that is shared by multiple people. In the second case, Sparx Systems recommends that each user identifies
themselves in each message, either at the beginning or at the end.
Whilst you are adding comments to a review, at any point you can return to a posted topic and add or change its status
and priority. To the right of the review topic text are two icons. The first is the 'Status' icon, and the second is the
'Priority' icon. The appearance of the icons depends on the current setting for status and priority. To set a status or
priority, simply click on the appropriate icon and select from the listed options. These are:
Status·
Priority ·
Add a reply to a comment
If you want to respond to either a review topic or a reply to that topic, click or tap on the appropriate message. A blank
field and button underneath the conversation thread will appear; type in your message and click or tap on this button:
Your reply is added to the end of the thread.
Note: Currently the review threads are only read from the model when the page is loaded, which means if other users
make additional comments they will not be displayed until the page is reloaded or refreshed.
Review another element
Click on the name of the Review element in the 'Reviews' panel or in the page footer, to display the Properties view for
that review element. Select another element in the review from the list.
Leave the current Review
When you have finished contributing to the review, you can either return to the Review element Properties view and
click on the Leave Review button, or log out of the current model.
The Leave Review button will only be enabled when the details of the currently joined Review element are loaded.
Creating a Review
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 253 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Typically, only a Project Manager will create Review elements in Enterprise Architect, notifying the relevant users of
their location so that each user can join and leave the review(s) as necessary.
However, a WebEA user might create a Review element as a direction to the Project Manager to set up. In this case you
create the Review element by clicking on the 'New' icon in the Package hierarchy view, selecting 'Review' as the element
type. The procedure is as described in the Add Elements and Features in WebEA Help topic.
You require specific access permissions to create a Review element; those permissions are totally separate from the
permission to join a review.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 254 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Discussions in WebEA
Enterprise Architect has a Discussion facility through which users can post short messages to have informal discussions
with other users on a specific element or Package. As a WebEA user, if the model has been configured to allow
Discussions to be viewed and added, you can also read and participate in these Discussions. The facility is very useful in
informal reviews, as you can comment or respond immediately on a specific point as you come across it, without having
to collate a list of comments and compose a relatively long document or email, or schedule a telephone call.
To access Discussions, when viewing the properties of an object in WebEA's main view, select the 'Discussions' feature
button.
Note that if you are joined to a formal review, you can read existing Discussion points but you cannot respond to them or
add new topics.
The input area shows as a blank field and a 'Discussion' button to save the entered text; if there has already been some
discussion on the element, the comments of each Discussion display above the input field.
There are two types of discussion messages, an initial message (usually called a Discussion) and replies. Replies are
responses to an initial message, and are displayed as child items.
Avatars
In Enterprise Architect there is an application option for the current users that controls if avatars of security users are
displayed with each Discussion item. In WebEA this option is defined for a model in the configuration file; see the
option use_avatars.
When a model has been configured to 'use avatars' and the model has security enabled, then instead of displaying generic
blue speech bubbles the author's avatar is displayed, as shown here:
Starting a discussion
To start a discussion on a new point, simply start typing in the blank field. If you want to have separate paragraphs, press
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 255 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
the Enter key to start each new line.
When you have finished typing your message, submit it by clicking on this button: 
Note: WebEA does not support editing (or deleting) discussions, therefore you should take care to type messages in
clearly the first time, and double check before submitting.
Depending on how the WebEA model is configured, you might connect to it using your personal user ID, or as a single
generic User that is shared by multiple people ('Web User' in the first illustration). In the second case, Sparx Systems
recommends that each user identifies themselves in each message, either at the beginning or at the end.
Replying to a discussion
If you are reading an existing discussion and want to respond to either the opening point or a reply to that point, click or
tap on the appropriate message. A blank field and button underneath the conversation thread will display; type in your
message and click or tap on this button: 
Your reply is added to the end of the thread.
Note: Currently the discussion threads are only read from the model when the page is loaded, which means if other users
make additional comments they will not be displayed until the page is reloaded or refreshed.
Status and Priority
If you are adding comments to a discussion, at any point you can return to a posted topic or reply and add or change its
status and priority.
To the right of the discussion text are two icons. The first is the 'Status' icon, and the second is the 'Priority' icon. The
appearance of the icons depends on the current setting for status and priority. To set a Status or Priority, simply click on
the appropriate icon and select from the listed options. These are:
Status·
Priority ·
Notes
As a WebEA user you cannot delete discussions or replies; however they can be deleted using of Enterprise ·
Architect
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 256 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 257 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create and check Watch Lists
The Watch List facility in WebEA helps you to quickly identify recent activity in the model. Each user can tailor their
Watch List to monitor activity in any of a wide range of objects and features with various characteristics. Whenever the
Watch List Summary is generated, all object types of interested are checked for recent activity and a count of matched
objects displayed. All matched object counts can be clicked on to display the list of objects that match the particular
activity type.
Note: Each model has a default set of activity types that have been enabled in the WebEA configuration file; each user
can override the model defaults and save their customized settings.
Watch Lists Summary
You can select the Watch List facility by selecting the 'Watchlist' option in the 'Search' menu. This immediately displays
the 'Watchlist summary' view that shows:
Any activity that has recently been detected, for ·
All objects and features that are to be monitored ·
If there is no activity for a configured activity type, that activity type is omitted from the 'Watchlist Summary'. The
display might look like this:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 258 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Every type of object on the report is represented by a line providing the number of objects that match the given criteria.
The number of objects is a link which, if you click or tap it, displays a results page listing the specific objects that match
the given criteria.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 259 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The watch list results page is the same as the custom search results page, in that if you then click or tap on an individual
item in the list, the 'Properties' view will be displayed for the selected object. See the WebEA's Layout Help topic.
If you have finished checking the 'Watchlist summary', you can click on the OK button to return to the WebEA view you
were displaying previously.
Alternatively, you can tailor the Watch List to provide information relevant to you; see Configure the Watchlist.
Configure the Watchlist
If you want to customize the activity types monitored in your Watchlist summary, click or tap the configure button 
located in the Watchlist summary header. The 'Watchlist configuration' page displays.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 260 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
In the 'Number of days' field, type the number of days that should be considered. This might be the number of days since
you last used WebEA, or the number of days in a reporting period that you want to compare with.
For the remaining fields, select the checkbox against all items that you want to monitor and include in your watch list.
The complete list is:
Recent: ·
    - Discussions
    - Active reviews
    - Modified diagrams
    - Modified elements
Resource Allocations: ·
    - Active
    - Ending today
    - Overdue
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 261 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Tests:·
    - Recently passed
    - Recently failed
    - Recently deferred
    - Recently not checked
    - Not run
Changes, Defects, Issues, Tasks and Decisions: ·
    - Verified
    - Recently requested
    - Recently completed
    - New
    - Incomplete
Events: ·
    - Recently requested
    - High Priority
    - Incomplete
The Select All and Deselect All options can be used to select or deselect all checkboxes.
Once you have finished choosing which items to monitor, click or tap on the Save button to save the configuration and
redisplay the Watch List summary.
Note:
All watch list options are saved based on current model and User ID for the current browser, and stored as cookies ·
(where possible) so that the options are remembered between sessions
If your browser does not allow the saving of cookies, then your customized watch list setting will only last as long as ·
the current session
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 262 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Relationship Matrix
The Matrix facility in WebEA enables you to view the Relationship Matrix generated from any Relationship Matrix
profile that has been defined in the model.
The Relationship Matrix is a spreadsheet display of relationships between model elements within a Package, or between
elements in two different Packages. It is a convenient and simple tool for reporting and working on all the relationships
in a selected structure. The relationships shown can be filtered according to:
The element type of the source and target elements in each relationship ·
The relationship type and direction ·
The Package(s) in which the source elements and target elements are held ·
Those parameters can be defined in a Relationship Matrix profile; to display a matrix in WebEA you select one of the
available profiles.
The matrix shows all the relationships of the specified type between source and target elements by:
Listing the source Package elements down the side of the matrix ·
Listing the target Package elements across the top of the matrix, and ·
If a relationship exists between a source and target element, displaying an arrow indicating the direction of the ·
relationship
Clicking on a square containing an arrow displays the Relationship Properties screen for the relationship represented by
that arrow. On that screen you can click on the source or target element names and display the Element Properties screen
for those elements.
Access
On the WebEA header, click on the 
  icon and select the 'Matrix' option. The 'Matrix Profiles' page displays.
Matrix Profiles
The 'Matrix Profiles' page provides a drop-down field that you use to list and select from the matrix profiles defined
within Enterprise Architect. You cannot add to or edit these profiles.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 263 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
When you select a matrix profile, the rest of the fields on the page will be populated with the values defined in the
profile. Click on the View Matrix button to load the relationships selected under the profile, in a Relationship Matrix
grid.
WebEA is only able to load complete matrix profiles; if an incomplete matrix profile is requested, this error message will
be displayed:
If this message is displayed, ask the Project Manager to update the Matrix Profile.
Matrix
This is a sample Relationship Matrix as displayed by WebEA. It is almost identical to what would be displayed in
Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 264 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
When you click on a relationship arrow - such as, in the example, the 'Add To Shopping Basket' to 'REQ014 - Shopping
Basket' arrow - the Relationship Properties screen displays.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 265 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
A Matrix Profile can also be accessed via a Hyperlink or a Matrix Specification Artifact on a diagram. ·
Matrix Profiles which use a Model Search to populate the source or target elements are not supported in WebEA. ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 266 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Search the model
WebEA provides a facility that enables you to search through the model for a specific item or group of items that have
certain characteristics. This can help you to quickly locate objects of importance, such as elements you have created
yourself (if you have the access privileges to do so).
You access the Search facility by clicking on the 'spyglass' icon in the WebEA header and selecting the 'Custom search'
option.
Search Specification
Define your search using these options.
Option Description
Term Type or paste in the string of characters or digits you want to locate - name, Notes
text or the complete object ID. Be aware that for some DBMSs - such as Firebird or
Oracle - searches are case-sensitive.
Search for Select one of these object types to search:
Diagrams ·
Elements ·
Packages ·
Discussions, or ·
Reviews ·
If you select 'Discussions', the 'Search in' and 'Term' options are not relevant and so
are grayed out and unavailable. The search is for elements having active
discussions within the specified time period.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 267 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Note: the 'Discussions' option is only available in models that have the
show_discuss parameter set to 'true' in the WebEA configuration file, and the
'Reviews' option is only available when the participate_in_reviews parameter is set
to 'true'.
Search in Select from the list of fields to search:
Name·
Name, Alias and Notes (the proper name, an assigned alternative name, and ·
any text written in the object's 'Notes' field)
Author (the person who created the object) ·
ID (the GUID of the object, displayed as the last item in the 'Properties' panel ·
when you expand it)
When Select the period of time that should be searched. You can select to search for
objects modified:
Today·
Within the last 3 days ·
Within the last 7 days ·
Within the last 14 days ·
Within the last 30 days ·
Within the last 12 months ·
At any time ·
Run Search Click or tap this button to execute the search and locate the objects that meet the
search criteria.
Search Results
When you execute the search the results are displayed in the main content area.
The results provide the object name, type, author and last-modified date of each object that matches the search criteria. If
you click on an item, the 'Properties' view will be loaded for that object.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 268 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Troubleshooting WebEA
If WebEA users experience a problem, an error message will be displayed on the screen. This topic provides a list of
common WebEA error messages that could occur. Each entry describes the situation that has occurred and provides
guidance on how to correct the error.
WebEA Configuration Test
On initial set up, these steps can be performed to help identify configuration issues:
Step Action
1 On the Web Server machine, open a web browser and test access to the WebEA login page.
E.g. http://localhost/webea/login.php
Failing this, check that the Web Server has been set up as described in the WebEA Installation and
Configuration topic.
2 On a client machine test access to the WebEA login page.
E.g. http://<server name>/webea/login.php
Failing this suggests there is a network/communication issue between the client and the web server.
3 Before attempting to access a model via WebEA, confirm you can successfully open the model using
Enterprise Architect's 'Connect to Cloud' option.
Failing this, refer to the Cloud Server Troubleshooting Help topic.
4 In the webea_config.ini file, add a model connection with the minimum required options, as outlined here.
Ensure these match the settings used when connecting via Enterprise Architect. Note, the 'sscs_db_alias'
should match the value entered in the 'Model Name' field.
sscs_protocol = "<Protocol>"
sscs_server = "<Server Name or IP address>"
sscs_port = "<Port>"
sscs_db_alias = "<Model Name>"
auth_code = ""     ;leave this empty
If the Project has Enterprise Architect User Security enabled then also include:
login_prompt = "true"
If the Protocol being used is HTTPS then also include:
sscs_use_ssl = "true"
If you are using HTTPS with a Self-signed certificate then also include:
sscs_enforce_certs = "false"
5 Try accessing the model in WebEA. Failing this, the error returned by the WebEA login screen might help
identify the cause of the issue.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 269 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
WebEA Error Messages
Issue Comments
Server could not be found Server could not be found on the network!
This error usually occurs when WebEA does not receive any kind of response from
the specified server name (or IP number).
Possible reasons:
The server is turned off ·
The server is behind a firewall and WebEA is unable to make a connection to it ·
Connection refused There was no response from the server, check that Pro Cloud Service is running!
Possible reasons:
Pro Cloud Service is not installed ·
Pro Cloud Service is not running ·
Pro Cloud Service is not listening on the expected port ·
OSLC not supported Your server is not configured to support OSLC.
Possible reasons:
WebEA communicates with Sparx Systems Cloud Service via OSLC, but the ·
defined Sparx Systems Cloud Service has been configured to not allow OSLC
requests for this Port.
Using the Cloud Configuration Client, check the configuration for the Port which
you are using to access this model. Ensure the "OSLC Supported" option is
enabled.
Protocol Mismatch Protocol and Port mismatch. Check that the correct protocol and port have been
configured.
Possible reasons:
There is a mismatch between the connection settings; for example, ·
'sscs_use_ssl' has been set to true but a protocol of HTTP was specified
Incorrect login details The specified login details were not valid for the current model!
Possible reasons:
The supplied user ID and password combination did not match any user ·
credentials defined in the model
Connection timed out Request Error: Connection timed out after 5001 milliseconds.
Possible reasons:
Invalid Cloud Server settings (sscs_*), WebEA cannot connect to the defined ·
server/port
Apache/PHP web server requires a proxy server to reach the Cloud Service ·
machine and the proxy settings defined in the .config file are incorrect or
invalid
Failed to Connect Request Error: Failed to connect to xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx port yy: Connection refused
Possible reasons:
The 'sscs_port' option in the webea_config.ini file does not match the port ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 270 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
setting in your Pro Cloud Service configuration file (SSCloudServices.config);
make them the same
Note that, if the Cloud Service is being re-directed via IIS, you must ensure this
matches the IIS port used for the Pro Cloud Service.
The configured database is
not definedThe configured database is not defined in the Cloud Service.
Possible reasons:
The 'sscs_db_alias' option in the webea_config.ini file does not correspond to ·
the 'Database Alias' defined in Add Database Manager; correct the values so
that they do correspond
Problem reading the model
rootProblem reading the model root.
Possible reasons:
The WebEA options for the current model do not match a Pro Cloud Server ·
configuration
You are attempting to access a DBMS repository which has not had a Project ·
transferred into it. See Step 4 on the Server Based Repositories help page.
No response when
selecting an ObjectAfter WebEA loads the initial page (the model root or default diagram), there is no
response to selecting objects.
Possible reasons:
Your browser does not have javascript enabled; re-enable it ·
The cURL PHP module/extension is not installed and enabled on the server; ·
install/enable cURL on your web server
The PHP version is wrong; it must be greater than PHP 5.0 with all extensions ·
supported
An unexpected response
was receivedAn unexpected response was received, check the cloud service configuration!
This error normally occurs while attempting to login or connect to a model from the
initial page. The error message will display whenever the response from the
configured Cloud Service does not return the expected XML message.
Check that the defined Sparx Systems Cloud Service server name and port are the
details of an actual Cloud Service and not those of a web server.
The selected database does
not have Pro Features
enabledThe selected database does not have Pro Features enabled.
This error normally occurs if the selected model does not have 'Pro Features'
enabled.
Possible reasons:
In the Cloud Service Configuration Client, the Database Manager for this ·
model does not have the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)'
option enabled
The Pro Cloud Server's license has expired and the server is now operating as ·
the free, core edition of the Cloud Service
The License key entered is invalid and the Pro Cloud Server is operating as the ·
core edition
Using the Cloud Service Configuration Client, check the Database Manager
configuration. Ensure that the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and
Integration)' option is enabled.
Diagram image not found Diagram image not found.
This error indicates that the diagram exists in the model, but the image of the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 271 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
diagram has not been generated.
Possible reasons:
The model does not have the 'Auto create Diagram Image and Image Map' ·
option enabled in model-specific options
The diagram was created in Enterprise Architect, but has not yet been saved ·
Or, the user is on an old version (prior to build 1350) of Enterprise Architect ·
and the Worker application is not running for this model (it has not been
configured, it is not currently running, or has not run since the diagram was
saved)
Open the model in Enterprise Architect (build 1350 or later), enabled the 'Data
Cache' options, and click on the 'Create' button as described in the 'Model
Configuration' section of the 'WebEA Installation and Configuration' topic.
Alternatively, ensure that the Worker application is running for this model. See the
'How to configure automatic viewable components' topic for details.
Resource not found 404 - Resource with identifier
'{XXXXXXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXXXXXXXXXX}' could not be found
The item (element, Package or diagram) with this GUID could not be found in the
current model.
Possible Reasons:
The item has been deleted from the model. ·
To confirm that the item has been deleted, check the parent Package (or parent
element) in WebEA.
If the error occurred when selecting an item on a diagram, the diagram image might
have to be regenerated.
SSL Error Error: SSL certificate problem: unable to get local issuer certificate
This error suggests you are attempting an HTTPS connection without having SSL
enabled.
Possible Reasons:
The webea_config.ini file does not include sscs_use_ssl = "true" for this ·
Model. Try adding this, then attempt to access the Model again.
Self signed certificate error Request Error: SSL certificate problem: self signed certificate
This error suggests you are attempting an HTTPS connection with SSL using a
self-signed certificate, however WebEA has not been configured to allow
self-signed certificates.
Possible Reasons:
The webea_config.ini file does not include sscs_enforce_certs = "false" for this ·
Model. Try adding this, then attempt to access the Model again.
No credentials provided 400 - User Security is enabled, however no credentials were provided.
Possible Reasons:
The Project has Enterprise Architect user security enabled; however, WebEA is ·
not configured to either show a login prompt or automatically login with
specific credentials
Check that the webea_config.ini contains:
    login_prompt = "true"
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 272 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Or, all of these:
    login_prompt = "false"
    sscs_model_user = "<user id>"
    sscs_model_pwd = "<password>"
Version Mismatch Warning - WebEA / OSLC Version mismatch
Each release of the Pro Cloud Service includes an OSLC component and the
WebEA component (php files). If you are using the OSLC component from one
release and the WebEA component from another, then WebEA might not function
as intended.
Possible Reasons:
A new version of the Pro Cloud Service was installed, however the new ·
version of WebEA was not copied to the Web Server
When updating the Pro Cloud Service to a newer version, ensure that WebEA is
also updated. That is, after performing the installation of the Pro Cloud Server,
copy the new WebEA files from the Cloud Server installation to the relevant
location on your web server.
Basic login fields not
shownThe basic login fields will not be visible when attempting to log in to a model under
these circumstances:
The webea_config.ini has sscs_model_user defined ·
The model has the user option 'Restrict access to Windows & OpenID users ·
only' enabled
Problems loading pages
Issue Comments
No response when clicking
on diagram elementsWhen clicking on an element on a diagram nothing happens.
Possible reason:
The element properties are being loaded in the Properties View, however the ·
Properties View is automatically hidden due to a narrow screen/browser width
(less than 800px).
From the hamburger menu at the top right of WebEA, select 'Properties' to turn off
the Properties View.
Pages don't load correctly After the server has been updated to a new version of WebEA, clients experience
problems with pages loading incorrectly.
Possible reason:
The user's browser is using a cached version of WebEA's client side files, ·
which is causing unpredictable results
The solution is to clear the browser cache, to force the browser to download the
latest version of the application files from the server; the process for clearing
the cache is different for each browser/device - consult the user manual for
your browser
Login page in Internet
ExplorerThe 'Login' page is not drawn correctly and appears different to other browsers; that
is, the selection boxes next to each model name are not square.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 273 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
All login attempts to models with authentication fail saying 'No model selected!'
Possible reasons:
IE is running in 'Compatibility View' mode, which does not support HTML5 ·
and CSS3; turn off 'Compatibility View' at least for the server hosting WebEA
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 274 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Prolaborate
The Enterprise Architect set of tools to deliver world-class modeling and design solutions to business, industry and
companies around the world has been significantly expanded with the inclusion of Prolaborate in the Pro Cloud Server
offering.
Prolaborate represents the next step in effectively delivering rich models to a much-expanded set of consumers. Whilst
Enterprise Architect has become the pre-eminent modeling and design solution globally for modelers and designers
wanting to visualize and understand complex systems, software and architecture, Prolaborate is the next step in
delivering those models and designs to the broader community and in enabling high level executives, business process
managers, process implementers, consultants, customers and other stakeholders to see their personal and curated view of
the model in a way that they are personally comfortable with!
Prolaborate is a tailored set of views that reduce complexity, focus attention and increase the accessibility of model
information for non-modelers and others who are more concerned with consuming the model than directly editing it
(although this can occur). Prolaborate provides a social platform 'outside the model' that supports talking about the model
from a different viewpoint to those actively engaged 'within the model'. Prolaborate also provides dashboards, impact
analysis and other 'outside the model' features that derive information from the model or provide unique windows into
the model for a custom audience (such as Chief Executive Officers, Chief Information Officers and customers).
Benefits:
Takes the next step - beyond modeling ·
A social and collaborative tool for everyone ·
Highly focused and customized model views ·
New ways of seeing and interacting with Enterprise Architect models ·
New tools for decision and impact analysis based on model content ·
A platform for 'out of model' reviews and discussions ·
For C-level executives looking for critical and strategic information ·
For model consumers reviewing or implementing process flows ·
For customers and other stakeholders who want to review and discuss the model ·
For developers and software teams ·
For those unfamiliar with modeling who want to understand and share their viewpoint ·
A rich and evocative environment tailored for individual domains ·
Discover the hidden value in your Enterprise Architect models ·
Engage with a broader audience - present and discuss at the 'right level' ·
For further information
Full documentation on Prolaborate is provided on the website. You can access this documentation by clicking on this
link (Javascript must be enabled on your web browser).
    https://prolaborate.sparxsystems.com/resources/documentation
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 275 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Integration Plugins
The Integration Plugins components represent a set of plugins (or extensions) for the Pro Cloud Server that enable data
from external providers to be displayed within Enterprise Architect. This component is only available in the 'premium'
editions of Sparx System Pro Cloud Server, ie Small Business, Team and Enterprise editions.
The Integration Plugins component is also known by name Server Based Plugin Interface (SBPI).
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 276 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Install and Configure
The Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server product is installed using a standard Microsoft Windows Installer package that
includes a number of optional components. One of these components is Integration Plugins, which is installed by default
into the C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\SBPI\ folder (assuming a 64bit machine is being used).
Requirements
In order to install a particular Integration Plugin you must have:
A licensed Pro Cloud Server ·
Physical network access to a server hosting the external data ·
User credentials to access the external data ·
Enterprise Architect Corporate, Unified or Ultimate edition v14 or later ·
What is in the Package?
The Integration Plugins folder initially consists of a Integration Server executable (SBPI.exe), a separate executable
(*SBPI.exe) for each supported external product, a sample configuration file and a text file describing the manual
installation and configuration steps.
Task Script
Integraton (SBPI) Server The SBPI.exe application acts as the interface between the Pro Cloud Server and
each of the plugins by translating Enterprise Architect requests, forwarding them to
the appropriate plugin and then returning the generated response to Enterprise
Architect.
Application Lifecycle
Manager PluginThe ALMSbpi.exe plugin interacts with the MicroFocus Application Lifecycle
Manager product (previously known as HP Quality Center).
Autodesk Plugin The AutodeskSbpi.exe plugin interacts with AutoCAD's file and management
component AutoDesk.
Bugzilla Plugin The BugzillaSbpi.exe plugin interacts with the web based defect/bug tracking
system that was originally developed and used by the Mozilla project and is now
licensed under the Mozilla Public License agreement.
Confluence Plugin The ConfluenceSbpi.exe plugin interacts with Atlassian's Team Collaboration
Software.
Dropbox Plugin The DropboxSbpi.exe plugin interacts with Dropbox's web based file hosting
service.
EA plugin The EASbpi.exe plugin interacts with external Sparx Systems's Enterprise Architect
Cloud-based repositories.
Jazz Plugin The JazzSbpi.exe plugin interacts with IBM Rational DOORS Next Generation's
requirements management tool.
Jira Plugin The JiraSbpi.exe plugin interacts with Atlassian's issue tracking system.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 277 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
ServiceNow Plugin The ServiceNowSbpi.exe plugin interacts with ServiceNow's asset management
component of its Cloud-based enterprise management system.
SharePoint Plugin The SharePointSbpi.exe plugin interacts with Microsoft's web-based collaborative
platform, SharePoint.
Team Foundation Server
(TFS) PluginThe TFSSbpi.exe plugin interacts with Microsoft's source code management.
Wrike Plugin The WrikeSbpi.exe plugin interacts with Wrike's project management system.
How to Set Up
The Integration framework consists of an Integration server (SBPI.EXE) application that starts one or more plugins (such
as DropboxSbpi.exe and JiraSbpi.exe). The Integration Server and each Integration plugin can be configured to run either
on the same machine as the Pro Cloud Server or on completely different machines. In the simplest configuration the
Integration server and all Integration Plugins are installed on a single server. There are two main advantages with this
configuration:
 1. The Pro Cloud Server will automatically start (and stop) all configured plugins whenever its Windows service is
started (or stopped).
 2. The Integration configuration GUI inbuilt into the Cloud Configuration client can be used to completely manage all
aspects of the Integration configuration; see the Steps - Simple table.
However if you elect to run the Integration Server or Integration plugins on different machine(s) to the Pro Cloud Server,
each of the individual plugins must be manually configured as well as configured to start as Windows services with the
correct parameters. See the Steps - Manual table.
Steps - Simple
The Integration configuration GUI included in the Cloud Configuration client removes most of the complexity involved
in configuring the Integration Server and Data Provider(s), therefore this is the recommended method for most users.
However this configuration method is restricted to running all Integration components (*SBPI.exe) on the same server as
the Pro Cloud Server.
Step Description
Configuring Pro Cloud
Server for IntegrationEach installation of Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server can be configured to
communicate with a single Integration Server; the configuration options of this
definition are defined as a series of registry settings, however the 'Integration' tab in
the Cloud Configuration Client allows the definition and maintenance of the
Integration Server options without the need for you to manually manipulate the
registry.
This image shows the definition of an Integration Server with the default settings:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 278 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Configuring Integration
Data ProvidersEach Data Provider (or Plugin) is defined as both a series of registry entries in
[HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Sparx
Systems\SQLBridge\SBPI\Plugins\{unique} and settings within a configuration
file. Again the Integration tab in the Cloud Configuration Client allows the
definition and maintenance of Integration Data Provider details without the need for
the user to manually manipulate the registry and configuration files.
Configuring the Firewall The Integration server (SBPI.exe) typically needs to be granted access through any
local firewall so that Enterprise Architect clients can connect to it. The Pro Cloud
Server installer will automatically create a Firewall exception that allows any
incoming requests to be passed through to SBPI.exe; however, the default settings
should be reviewed and adjusted to suit your environment.
Steps - Manual
Important: these steps are only needed if the Integration components need to run on different machine(s) to the Pro Cloud
Server, otherwise the Steps - Simple table should be used.
Step Description
Configuring Pro Cloud
Server for IntegrationEach installation of Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server can be configured to
communicate to a single Integration (or SBPI) server. These configuration options
are defined as a series of registry settings.
This is an example of all valid options for the Integration server:
    [HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Sparx Systems\SQLBridge\SBPI\Server]
    "Arguments"="-port 8080"
    "Port"=dword:00001f90
    "Path"="C:\\Program Files (x86)\\Sparx Systems\\Cloud
Services\\SBPI\\SBPI.exe"
    "Protocol"="http"
    "Server"="yourdomain.com"
Arguments - the arguments that are used to start the SBPI server, which ·
include the port the server should listen to; for example, "-port 8080"
Port - a hexadecimal value, representing the port number that the SBPI server ·
should be listening to, which value should match the value specified in the
arguments; for example, dword:00001f90  (decimal 8080)
Path - the full path to the SBPI server's EXE; for example: ·
    "C:\\Program Files (x86)\\Sparx Systems\\Cloud Services\\SBPI\\SBPI.exe"
When SBPI.EXE and the Pro Cloud Server are running on the same machine,
PCS will attempt to start the SBPI.exe in this location
Protocol - the protocol that should be used to communicate to the machine ·
hosting the SBPI server; that is, http or https
Server - the name (or IP number) of the machine hosting the SPBI server (for ·
example, yourdomain.com); it is important to realize that this address is
forwarded to the client (Enterprise Architect) so that it can make direct
requests, which means the name or IP must be resolvable from the client
machines
Note:  The SBPI server typically needs to be granted access through any local
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 279 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
firewall so that clients can connect to it. The ProCloudServer installer will
automatically create a Firewall exception that allows any incoming request to be
passed through; however, the default settings should be reviewed and adjusted to
suit your environment.
Configuring External Data
SourcesEach External Data Source is defined as a series of registry entries in
[HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Sparx
Systems\SQLBridge\SBPI\Plugins\{unique}, where {unique} is a unique UUID for
the data source. This is an example of a complete External Data Source definition:
   [HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Sparx
Systems\SQLBridge\SBPI\Plugins\{853489C1-4C22-4bad-9A8E-3098D07A3FC1
}]
   "Arguments"="-port 8081 -config Jira1.config"
   "Name"="Sparx Systems Sample account"
   "Path"="C:\\Program Files (x86)\\Sparx Systems\\Cloud
Services\\SBPI\\JiraSbpi.exe"
   "Port"=dword:00001f91
   "Prefix"="jira"
   "Protocol"="http"
   "Server"="127.0.0.1"
   "Type"="Jira"
Arguments - the arguments that should be used to start the plugin, which include
the port the plugin should listen to and the name of the configuration file; for
example, "-port 8081 -config Jira1.config"
Name - a 'friendly' project name to describe the external data source, which is
displayed to all Enterprise Architect users; for example 'Sparx Systems Sample
account'
Path - the full path to the plugin's EXE; for example, C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx
Systems\Cloud Services\Service\JiraSbpi.exe
Port - a hexadecimal value representing the port number that the external data
source expects to receive requests on, which value should match the value specified
in the arguments; for example, dword:00001f91
Prefix - a short unique name that is meaningful to the users and prefixes each link
stored within the Enterprise Architect model; for example, jira::10001 (where
10001 is the Jira object ID)
Protocol - the protocol that should be used to communicate to the machine hosting
the plugin, such as http or https
Server - the name (or IP number) of the machine hosting the plugin (for example,
yourdomain.com or 127.0.0.1); it is important to realize that this address is relative
to the machine hosting the SBPI server, therefore the name or IP must be resolvable
from the SBPI host machine
Type - a generic name to 'group' external data sources within Enterprise Architect
Each External Data Source requires its own set of options to define the details of
how the configured Plugin connects to the External Data Source. These settings are
stored in a .CONFIG file that resides in the same location as the Plugin's .EXE file.
For example, using the above definition a 'Jira1.config' would need to be created,
and would contain information similar to this:
    SERVER=example.com
    PROTOCOL=https
    PORT=443
    BASEURL=myproject
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 280 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
    USERNAME=
    PASSWORD=
    CREATEITEMS=false
    MODIFYITEMS=false
    POSTDISCUSSIONS=true
    PROXY=10.0.0.0:3128
    PROXYBYPASS=<local>;10.*
    IGNORESSLERRORS=true
SERVER    - the name (or IP number) of the external data source's server, such as
example.com
PROTOCOL - the communicate protocol, such as https
PORT - the port the external data source is configured to listen on, such as 443
BASEURL - when the external data source supports multiple 'projects', the
BaseURL property identifies which should be used; for example, for Enterprise
Architect SBPI the BaseURL is the DB Alias as defined in the PCS
USERNAME - optional - see Note1
PASSWORD - optional - see Note1
CREATEITEMS - defines if Enterprise Architect users can create items in the
External Data Source - see Note2; default value: false
MODIFYITEMS - defines if Enterprise Architect users can modify existing items
in the External Data Source - see Note2; default value: false
POSTDISCUSSIONS - defines if Enterprise Architect users can add Discussions
to items within the External Data Source - see Note2; default value: true
PROXY - optional - the server name or IP number and port of the proxy server,
such as 10.0.0.0:3128
PROXYBYPASS - optional - a semi colon separated list of IP numbers that should
not be sent through the proxy; for example, <local>;10.*
IGNORESSLERRORS - optional - a boolean value to ignore any SSL certificate
errors
Note1
If the external server supports OAuth 2 authentication (Autodesk, Dropbox and
Wrike), when accessing from within Enterprise Architect, a browser window will
open and prompt you to log in to the external account and allow Enterprise
Architect to access your account.
Enterprise Architect never sees your credentials in this process, instead it is
provided with a unique token to access the external account.
If the external server allows basic authentication, then the username and password
can be optionally set in the configuration file.
If the username and password are not specified in the configuration file, Enterprise
Architect will prompt you for credentials to access the external data.
Note2
Not all external products support the creation and modification of their objects, for
example Dropbox.
Configuring Models for
External Data SourcesIn order for users of an Enterprise Architect model to connect to a given External
Data Source, a 'binding' between the Enterprise Architect model and the External
Data Source must be configured. This is performed by a series of registry settings in
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 281 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
[HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Sparx
Systems\SQLBridge\SBPI\Bindings\{unique}] for each model/external data source
combination. In this string, {unique} is an 8 hexadecimal digit number uniquely
identifying the binding. For example:
    [HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Sparx
Systems\SQLBridge\SBPI\Bindings\B6EE6851]
    "LocalModel"="eaexample"
    "Plugin"="{853489C1-4C22-4bad-9A8E-3098D07A3FC1}"
LocalModel - the DB Alias of the model, such as eaexample
Plugin - the UUID of the external data source; for example,
{853489C1-4C22-4bad-9A8E-3098D07A3FC1}
Special Notes
Using SSL at the Integration Server or Provider Level
If you choose to implement the HTTPS protocol at either the Intergration Server or Integration Provider levels the
Integration Executables (*SBPI.EXE) will require a 'server.pem' file in the same folder as themselves, therefore if using
the default installation path this would mean 'server.pem' should be placed into the C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx
Systems\Cloud Services\SBPI\ folder.
See sections SSL Certificates and Self-Signed Certificate using OpenSSL on the page Add a Port Definition for more
information on how to create a valid 'server.pem' file.
The Integration Plugin for Enterprise Architect requires
- the BaseURL is the model's DB Alias
- the defined model must be configured as 'Enabled' and 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)' in the
Pro Cloud Server
What data is returned by Integration Plugins
Each of the Integration plugins developed by Sparx Systems returns information based on a 'Filter' or position within the
product's external data. Some products, such as Enterprise Architect, Jira and TFS, provide a mechanism to customize
the data returned, whilst others simply return all information at a particular position within the data.
Note: For Enterprise Architect, Jira or TFS the filters must be configured prior to Enterprise Architect requesting that an
Integration Plugin should connect to them.
Provider Information returned
Application Lifecycle
ManagerInformation returned based on the internal list for Defects, Requirements and Tests.
AutoDesk Information returned based on the contents of: Hubs | Projects | Folders
Bugzilla Information returned based on the contents of: Product | Component | <all items in
component>
Dropbox Information returned based on the contents of: Folders
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 282 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
EA Presents a list of 'External Model' searches as defined in the local model. see screen
'Find in Project' | External Models
Jazz Information returned based on the contents of: (DoorsNG) - Folders
Jira Presents a list of 'Favorite Filters'. See menu option Issues | Manage Filters
ServiceNow Presents a list of user defined filters, grouped by the table they are based on.
Team Foundation Server Presents a list of TFS global and 'My ...' queries
Wrike Information returned based on the contents of: Accounts | Folders
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 283 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
User Guide
The 'Integration Plugins' component of the Pro Cloud Server runs as a series of executables (.EXE) that do not have a
graphical user interface (GUI) themselves; however, this User Guide describes the configuration editor screen(s) that are
included in the Pro Cloud Server's Configuration Client that can be used to configure the Integration Plugins.
The main screen of the Configuration Client (installed as part of the Pro Cloud Server) includes an 'Integration' tab that is
divided into two main sections. The top half defines the details of the Integration Server (or SBPI Server) with the lower
half displaying the details of the various 'Data Providers'; each of these sections is described in greater detail in this topic.
Note 1: The 'Integration' tab of the Configuration Client is only available in the premium editions of the Pro Cloud
Server; that is, the Small Business, Team and Enterprise editions
Note 2: Any changes to the Integration Server or Plugins (made either through the Configuration Client or manually) will
require a restart of the Pro Cloud Server
Integration Server
All requests for external data from Enterprise Architect are sent to the Integration Server (via the Pro Cloud Server),
which decides which Data Provider (or SBPI Plugin) needs to action the request.
Note: the Integration Server settings are only mandatory, when the Enabled flag is checked. The combination of
Protocol, Name and Port need to match the machine hosting the Integration Server (in this case the Pro Cloud Server) in
order for Enterprise Architect clients to be able to communicate to it.
Item Description
Enable Integrations Default value: Checked
This checkbox enables (or disables) Integration Plugins for the current Pro Cloud
Server installation.
When this value is checked it implies that the other fields (Protocol, Name, Port and
Path) are now mandatory and the Integration Server definition can not be saved
without a value in each field.
Load Defaults This button loads the default values for the Integration Server settings into any
empty field.
Note: if a field already has a value, then the 'Load Default' button will not change or
update this existing value.
Executable Path Default value: {PCS installation folder}\SBPI\SBPI.exe
This value defines the complete path for the Integration Server's executable, and if
defined, implies that the Pro Cloud Server should automatically start this
application when it's own service starts up (assuming the Integration Server
Enabled flag is checked).
If the Pro Cloud Server is installed into the default location then this value should
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 284 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
be  C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\SBPI\SBPI.exe.
Save This button saves any pending changes to the Integration Server settings and is only
enabled when there are unsaved changes.
Protocol Default value: HTTP
When the 'Use Proxy' option is unchecked, this value defines both the Protocol the
Integration Server will listen on and the Protocol Enterprise Architect client will
use to communicate to the Integration Server.
When the 'Use Proxy' option is checked, this value defines the Protocol that the
Integration server will listen with.
Name/IP Default value: {blank}
This value defines the machine name or IP of the server hosting the Integration
Server.
When the 'Use Proxy' option is unchecked, this value defines both the machine
name hosting the Integration Server and the machine name Enterprise Architect
client will send their Integration related requests to. It is important to remember that
this value is supplied to the Enterprise Architect clients so the Name/IP must be
resolvable by them and not the current machine.
When the 'Use Proxy' option is checked, this value defines the Server Name/IP of
the machine hosting the Integration Server, the Proxy is responsible for converting
the client Name/IP requested by Enterprise Architect to this value.
Port Default value: 8080
When the 'Use Proxy' option is unchecked, this value defines both the Port that the
Integration Server will listen on and the Port Enterprise Architect clients will send
requests to.
When the 'Use Proxy' option is checked, this value defines the Port that the
Integration server will listen on.
Ignore SSL Errors Default value: unchecked
This value defines if SSL related errors that occur while communicating to the
Integration Server component should be ignored. The most common SSL errors are
related to self signed certificates, by default a client does not treat self signed
certificates as being secure, therefore in order to connect to server that use self
signed certificates this option should be checked.
Use Proxy Default value: unchecked
This value defines if the Integration Server is operating behind a proxy and if
Enterprise Architect clients are required to connect to one URL, but the Integration
Server is physically listening for requests on a completely different URL. In most
environments this option should be set to the default value of unchecked.
This option was introduced in Pro Cloud Server 3.0.23, earlier versions were not
capable of working in an environment that used a Proxy.
Client Protocol Default value: {Protocol} - as set when the 'Use Proxy' option is checked
This value is only available when the 'Use Proxy' option is checked and defines the
Protocol that Enterprise Architect client will use to communicate to the Integration
Server.
Client Name/IP Default value:  {Name/IP} - as set when the 'Use Proxy' option is checked
This value is only available when the 'Use Proxy' option is checked and defines the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 285 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
machine name or IP of the server clients should send Integration requests to. It is
important to remember that this value is supplied to the Enterprise Architect clients
so the Name/IP must be resolvable by them and not the current machine.
Client Port Default value:  {Port} - as set when the 'Use Proxy' option is checked
This value is only available when the 'Use Proxy' option is checked and defines the
Port that Enterprise Architect clients will send requests for the Integration Server
to, this implies that when the Integration Server starts, it will configure itself to start
listening on the specified port.
Data Providers
A single Pro Cloud Server can support any number of external Data Providers, and in turn each of the external Data
Providers can be available to as many models as are supported by the installations license. Please note only Pro-enabled
repositories (or database managers) can access external data providers. A Pro-enabled database manager is one that has
the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)' option checked.
Defined Providers This list defines a summary of all defined external Data Providers.
Double-clicking an existing item will display the 'Edit Data Providers' screen.
Add... This button displays the "Add Data Provider" screen to allow the entry of a new
external Data Provider. See Add/Edit Data Provider
Edit... This button displays the Edit Data Provider screen to allow the modification an
existing external Data Provider definition. See the Add/Edit Data Provider Help
topic.
Remove This button permanently deletes the selected Data Provider and all of its Bindings.
Note: this button is only enabled when there is a Data Provider selected.
Bindings This control displays a check list of all Database Managers that are Pro enabled
(that is, the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)' option is
selected). A checked Database Manager allocates the current Data Provider to the
given repository.
Check All This button is a quick and easy way to allocate all defined Pro enabled Database
Managers to the currently selected Data Provider.
Uncheck All This button is a quick and easy way to unallocate all defined Pro enabled Database
Managers from the currently selected Data Provider.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 286 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add/Edit Data Provider
The 'Add/Edit Data Provider' screen will be shown whenever you request to create a new Data Provider or edit an
existing one. The screen's behavior will be identical in either mode, the one difference being that the details of the
selected Data Provider will be displayed when the screen loads in Edit mode.
When you choose to add a new Data Provider, the screen will initially display as shown:
Wherever possible the 'Add/Edit Data Provider' screen will fill each field with a default value in order to make it easier
for you; if the default values are not correct, simply overwrite them. To this end, whenever the 'Provider' value is
changed, a number of other fields will be set to the default values for the new Provider, such as the Data Provider's
Prefix, the Integration Plugins' Executable Path and config filename, as shown here when Enterprise Architect is
selected:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 287 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Note: When defining a Data Provider there are a number of mandatory fields (denoted with a '*') that require a value
before a Data Provider can be saved.
Data Provider settings
Item Description
Name This value represents the friendly name for the current Data Provider, it will be
shown to users of Enterprise Architect.
Provider This value specifies the Provider type of the current Data Provider; only supported
values can be used. As mentioned, whenever this value is changed a number of
other fields can be automatically updated to make data entry easier for the user.
Prefix This value represents a short unique name to identify the current Data Provider.
This value will be saved against every Enterprise Architect element that is linked to
an external element.
Integration Plugin settings
This group of settings related to the physical location of the Integration Plugin relative to the Integration Server, the
combintation of Protocol, Server Name and Port must be resolvable by the machine hosting the Integration Server, so
that requests can be forwarded to it. In the simplest case the Integration Plugin will reside in the same folder as the
Integration Server, ie C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\SBPI
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 288 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Item Description
Protocol This value represents the protocol that the Integration Server should use to
communicate to the Integration Plugin, in the simplest configuration this will be
HTTP.
Server Name/IP This value represents the Server Name or IP that the Integration Server should use
to communicate to the Integration Plugin, in the simplest configuration this will be
localhost (or 127.0.0.1).
Port This value represents that the Integration Server should use to communicate to the
Integration Plugin. Each Integration Plugin requires a unique Port number. The
application automatically initializes this to 8081.
Executable Path This value represents the physical path to the Integration Plugin executable file. If a
value is specified the Integration Server will attempt to start this executable during
it own startup routine.
Config filename This value represents the physical filename of the configuration file for the current
Integration Plugin, which must reside in the same folder as the Integration Plugin's
executable.
Provider Server settings
This group of settings relate to the details of the external data provider, ie Dropbox, Jira or TFS.  The Integration Plugin
will use the defined details to connect to the remote system and retrieve data from it so that it can be sent back to
Enterprise Architect. The combination of Protocol, Server Name and Port must be resolvable by the server hosting the
Integration Plugin, which in the simplest case is the Pro Cloud Server.
Item Description
Protocol This value represents the protocol that the Integration Plugin should use to
communicate to the external Data Provider.
Server Name/IP This value represents the Server Name/IP that the Integration Plugin should use to
communicate to the external Data Provider.
Port This value represents the port that the Integration Plugin should use to
communicate to the external Data Provider.
Base URL Some external Data Providers allow for the concept of multiple repositories at a
single location, for such Data Providers this field acts as a filter.
For example it is possible to use another Enterprise Architect model as an external
data source, in the case of Enterprise Architect the Protocol, Server & Port
determine the Pro Cloud Server, the Base URL is the DB Alias of the repository.
Link Base Some external Data Providers allow for the concept of elements providing a direct
external link to themselves, for such Data Providers this field acts as a base URL
that the individual element's unique identifier can be appended to.
In the case of an Enterprise Architect external Data Provider, the Link Base field
defines the WebEA address (including the model number) for the external data
provider. ie "http://192.168.0.10?m=2"
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 289 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
User Name This value represents the user name that should be used (in combination with the
password) to access the data within the external system. If a value is defined in this
field all Enterprise Architect users of the current Data Provider will use the same
set of credentials to read the external system. Otherwise if the user name field is left
empty, Enterprise Architect will prompt each user independently for their
credentials.
Password This value represents the matching password for the specified user name.
Create Items Default value: unchecked
This checkbox controls if Enterprise Architect users are able to create new items
within the external system.
Modify Items Default value: unchecked
This checkbox controls if Enterprise Architect users are able to modify the details
of external items within the external system.
Post Discussions Default value: checked
This checkbox controls if Enterprise Architect users are able to create discussions
against elements within the external system.
Ignore SSL Errors Default value: unchecked
This checkbox controls if the Integration Plugin should ignore SSL related errors
that occur as a result of communicating to the external system.
Logging settings
This group of settings relate to the how the Integration Plugin will create entries in it's log file(s). Since the Integration
Plugins run without user intervention, it is important for them to be able to write to any messages or potential problems
to a log file. However special consideration must be made to ensure that performance isn't impacted by writing to such
files, which is possible if the log file continually grows without limits. It is also unreasonable to expect that manual
intervention should be required to ensure that the size and number of log files don't impact performance.  For these
reasons each Integration Plugin has it's own set of log files and configuration options to manage its log files.
The current log file will always include a '1' on the end of its filename. A new log file will be created whenever the
Integration Plugin is started or the physical size of the current log file reaches the Max File Size. When this occurs all
existing files will be 'rolled over', meaning their file numbers will be incremented and a new '{filename}1.log' created. If
the roll over process causes more files to exist than the 'File Count' setting allows, these additional files will be deleted.
Item Description
File Count Default value: 3
This value represents the 'rolling' number of log files that should be retained for the
current Integration Plugin.
Max File Size Default value: 1048576
This value represents the maximum number of bytes a log file can be before a new
one is created.
Level Default value:  WARNING
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 290 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
This value represents what maximum level of messages that should be written to
the log file. The levels are: OFF, FATAL, WARNING, INFO and SYSTEM. A
defined log level is inclusive of all lower levels, therefore if a Plugin is set to a log
level of INFO then all FATAL, WARNING and INFO messages will be written to
its log file.
Directory (READ-ONLY) This field displays the physically location of where the log files for
the current Data Provider will be saved.
Proxy settings
This group of settings relate to how the Integration Plugin should communications to the External Data Provider when
they are separated by a Proxy Server.
Item Description
Server Name/IP The server name (or IP) and port number of the Proxy Server. ie
proxyserver.com:3131
Bypass This field provides a mechanism for certain addresses to bypass the proxy; it
accepts multiple values separated by semi-colons (;). For example,
192.168.*;*.localdomain.com;www.mydomain.com
User Name If the Proxy Serer requires credentials, then enter the user name into this field.
Password If the Proxy Serer requires credentials, then enter the password into this field.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 291 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Troubleshooting
Integration Server messages
There are a number of error messages that could display during the definition of the Integration Server settings; most are
self explanatory. This table describes the most common error messages.
Error Message
"Please enter a value for [field_names]. The Integration Server can only be saved (while enabled) when all
mandantory fields have a value."
Reason: When the Enabled flag is checked, all remaining Integration Server fields are mandatory. This message
occurs when one or more Integration Server fields are empty and the Enabled flag has been checked. [field_names]
represents a placeholder for a comma separated list of field names that are empty.
"The executable name of SBPI.EXE was expected."
Reason: The 'Executable Path' field has a value but it does not include the filename "...\SBPI.exe", which is the only
valid filename that can be used.
"The specified Integration Server path of [full_path] does not exist or is invalid"
Reason: The 'Executable Path' field has a value but the path portion of the specified value is not valid or does not
exist on the Pro Cloud Server machine.
"The specified Port is a duplicate of [duplicate_plugin_name]"
Reason: The 'Port' field has been assigned a Port number, however it is a duplicate of a port being used by the
Integration Data Provider with the name [duplicate_plugin_name].
Integration Data Provider messages
There are a numerous error messages that could display during the definition of a Integration Data Provider; most are self
explanatory. This table describes the most common error messages.
Error Message
"Please enter a value for [field_names]. An Integration Provider cannot be saved without all mandatory fields being
assigned a value."
Reason: To minimize the chance of defining an invalid Data Provider the application ensures that all mandatory
fields are given a value. [field_names] represents a placeholder for a comma separated list of field names that are
empty.
"The specified execution path for the provider does not exist or is invalid, [full_path]"
Reason: The 'Execution Path' for the data provider has been assigned a value, however either the path, filename or
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 292 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
both cannot be found on the local machine.
"Ports needs to be unique across all Providers, the port value of [new_port] has already been used by
[other_provider]"
Reason: A Port number has be defined for the current Data Provider, however the value is a duplicate of another
provider's port.
"The specified Port is a duplicate of the Integration Server"
Reason:  A Port number has be defined for the current Data Provider, however the value is a duplicate of port used
by the Integration Server.
"Failed to rename config file [old_filename] to [new_filename]"
Reason: When the user changes the config filename of an existing Data Provider the Cloud Server must rename the
old filename to the new one. This message will be shown if the rename task is not successful, (which can occur if
the file is in use by another process) and this case manual intervention is the only way to resolve this issue.
"Prefixes needs to be unique across all Providers, the prefix value of [new_prefix] has already been used by
[other_provider]"
Reason:  A Prefix has be defined for the current Data Provider, however the value is a duplicate of prefix used by
another provider.
"Config filenames needs to be unique across all Providers, the config filename of [new_filename] has already been
used by [other_provider]"
Reason:  A Config filename has be defined for the current Data Provider, however the value is a duplicate of config
filename used by another provider.
General Troubleshooting
This table provides general advice to help identify and resolve common issues with the Integration component of the Pro
Cloud Server.
Error Message
Problem: After making changes to the Integration definitions of the Server or Data Providers, the Enterprise
Architect users do not notice any differences.
Reason: After changing the Integration configuration was the Pro Cloud Server restarted? If not restart the Pro
Cloud Server.
Problem: A newly configured Integration Data Provider is not listed in the navigation breadcrumb of Enterprise
Architect (after the Pro Cloud Server has been restarted).
Reason: Confirm that the currently open Model has a Binding entry for the Data Provider. See the Bindings item in
User Guide topic for details.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 293 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Problem: Selecting items within the Integration navigation breadcrumb of Enterprise Architect seem to have no
effect.
Reason: It is possible that errors (or warnings) are occurring which are logged to the System Output Window,
therefore make sure the System Output Window is shown while using the Integration window.
Problem: General errors seem to be occurring however no useful information is shown in the System Output
Window.
Resolution: Each Integration Data Provider has the capability to write detailed entries to a log file, to ensure that the
most detailed information is written, change the log level for the Data Provider to SYSTEM (restart the Pro Cloud
Server) and then retry the same action in Enterprise Architect. Then review the Data Provider's log file, ie in
C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\SBPI\Logs on the Pro Cloud Server.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 294 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Visibility Levels
The 'Visibility Levels' feature within Enterprise Architect provides the ability to restrict access to certain sections of a
model. Only models hosted by a Pro Cloud Server are able to make use of this feature. Visibility Levels are implemented
by taking advantage of the Row Level Security feature included in Oracle 8+ and Microsoft SQL Server 2016 (onwards).
Row Level Security is a security feature that controls which database users can access which rows of data in a database.
Traditional database security only provides the ability to control which users have access to read, write or delete data
down to the table level. Since Row Level Security functionality is implemented by the database, it is impossible for users
to bypass security implemented at the application level, by writing their own scripts or databases queries. That is, the
database ensures that users can only view and update data they are authorized to access.
Since Row Level Security is functionality implemented by the database, most of the configuration for Enterprise
Architect and the Pro Cloud Server to support it is performed directly in the database without needing to change the
application code base, which means there is less to go wrong from an application point of view.
Database / Application Users
It is important to understand the distinction between database and application users. The introduction mentions that
visibility levels are based on Database User permissions. In the Sparx System Cloud Server environment, each Database
Manager is defined with all of its connection details (including the user and password) to a given database. It is the
database user, the user identified in the connection details, that visibility levels are based on.
This concept is not to be confused with Enterprise Architect model users; that is, the user ID/password that is entered
when accessing a security enabled model. This is an application user.
Note: Enterprise Architect's model security is not mandatory, whereas all DBMSs require a database user to be defined in
order to access data within the database.
How it works
In additional to their normal permissions, database users are granted access to one or more visibility levels. A new
column, VIS_LVL (Visibility Level), is added to 24 critical tables within the Enterprise Architect database. This field
stores the visibility level that is needed to view/update this record.
For each of the 24 tables a security policy is defined that ensures each database user only sees records that their assigned
visibility level is authorized to view.
Database triggers are then used to maintain the value of the VIS_LVL columns in all tables for all child objects and
elements. For example, setting the visibility level of a Package in Enterprise Architect's Project Browser will update the
selected Package and all of its children to the entered visibility level.
Note: The base scripts supplied by Sparx Systems support 20 'levels' of security (that is, 1 to 20); however this can easily
be adjusted by manually changing the number of rows that are inserted into the T_VISIBILITYLEVELS table at the
beginning of the script. Level 0 is a special case, representing the default value; it implies that all database users (even
those without an assigned visibility level) can view or update records of this level.
The Drawback
As with most things, the Visibility Levels functionality comes at a cost when compared to the same model without
Visibility Levels enabled. Both SQL Server's and Oracle's Row Level Security functional imposes extra processing on
the database server that needs to be performed whenever data is selected, this extra processing takes time, how much
time depends on the type and amount of data being selected, so it is very hard to estimate. Sparx System's
implementation of Visibility Levels has attempted to design its solution in the most efficient way possible however it is
unavoidable that models with Visibility Levels will perform slower than models without.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 295 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 296 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Install and Configure
The Sparx Systems Pro Cloud Server product is installed using a standard Microsoft Windows Installer package that
includes a number of optional components. One of these components is Visibility Levels, which is installed by default
into the C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\RLS\ folder (assuming a 64bit machine is being used). If
necessary, you can change the install location of the Visibility Levels files.
Requirements
In order to use Visibility Levels you must have:
A licensed Pro Cloud Server ·
An Oracle 8+ or SQL Server 2016+ based Enterprise Architect model/repository that uses the EA1220 schema ·
definition
An SQL based management console tool that supports the execution of SQL scripts ·
Enterprise Architect build 14.0 or later ·
Enterprise Architect Ultimate Edition for assignment of Visibility Level on a Package ·
What is in the Package?
The Visibility Levels folder consists of a number of SQL script files that will either apply or remove the required
database changes to an Enterprise Architect model so that it can support the DBMS's native Row Level Security feature.
The implementation of Row Level Security in Oracle is completely different to the implementation in SQL Server. While
the end result behaves the same way, the physical objects that are needed by each DBMS are sufficiently different for
each to need its own creation script.
Task Script
Apply Visibility Level
changes to Oracle modelEASchema_VL_Updates_Oracle_1220.sql - Oracle SQL script that will update an
existing Enterprise Architect Oracle based repository so that it supports Visibility
Levels, by creating a set of functions, procedures, policies, triggers and columns.
Apply Visibility Level
changes to SQL Server
modelEASchema_VL_Updates_SQLServer_1220.sql - SQLServer specific SQL script
that will update an existing Enterprise Architect MS SQL Server based repository
so that it supports Visibility Levels, by creating a set of functions, procedures,
policies, triggers, roles and columns.
Remove Visibility Level
changes from Oracle modelEASchema_VL_Removal_Oracle_1220.sql - Oracle SQL script that will remove
the functions, procedures, policies, triggers, roles and additional columns that were
added to support Enterprise Architect's Visibility Levels.
Note: All basic Enterprise Architect modeling data will remain unchanged by the
removal script.
Remove Visibility Level
changes from SQL Server
modelEASchema_VL_Removal_SQLServer_1220.sql - SQLServer SQL script that will
remove the functions, policies, triggers, roles and additional columns that were
added to support Enterprise Architect's Visibility Levels.
Note: All basic Enterprise Architect modeling data will remain unchanged by the
removal script.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 297 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
How to execute
In order for an Enterprise Architect model to support Visibility Levels, the appropriate update script must be executed on
that model's database. The script is standard SQL, so any tool can be used; however, you must connect using an ID with
owner privileges because updates will be made to the physical schema.
Script Execution for Oracle
Identify the Enterprise Architect model database to which to apply Visibility Levels. 1.
Ask all users to log out of the model. 2.
(Optional step) Physically stop any further user access to the database; for example, disconnect the server from the 3.
network.
Perform a complete backup of the database. 4.
Open your SQL console of choice and connect to the database as the owner. 5.
Load the Oracle script ('EASchema_RLS_Updates_Oracle_1220.sql') into the console. 6.
Review the comments at the top of the script, in particular the section that outlines the tasks that need to occur 7.
before running the script.
Make the needed adjustments to the script for your environment/preferences. 8.
Execute the script. 9.
Follow the set of instructions documented at the top of the script in the 'Do the following AFTER running this script' 10.
section
Perform a second complete backup of the database, as a restore point. 11.
Define the Database Managers in the Pro Cloud Server (refer to the Defining Visibility Level Aware Database 12.
Managers table in the Visibility Levels User Guide).
(Optional step) If Step 3 was performed, re-enable regular user access to the database. 13.
Open Enterprise Architect Ultimate edition, connect to the Pro Cloud model with the highest Visibility Level (as 14.
defined in step 12) and set the Visibility Level on all Packages to their required values.
Script Execution for MS SQL Server
Identify the Enterprise Architect model database to which to apply Visibility Levels. 1.
Ask all users to log out of the model. 2.
(Optional step) Physically stop any further user access to the database; for example, disconnect the server from the 3.
network.
Perform a complete backup of the database. 4.
Open your SQL console of choice and connect to the database as the owner. 5.
Load the SQL script ('EASchema_RLS_Updates_SQLServer_1220.sql'). 6.
Review the comments at the top of the script, in particular the section that outlines the tasks that need to occur 7.
before running the script.
Make the needed adjustments to the script for your environment/preferences. 8.
Execute the script. 9.
Follow the set of instructions documented at the top of the script in the 'Do the following AFTER running this script' 10.
section
Perform a second complete backup of the database, as a restore point. 11.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 298 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Define the Database Managers in the Pro Cloud Server (refer to the Defining Visibility aware Database Managers 12.
table in the Visibility Levels User Guide).
(Optional step) If Step 3 was performed, re-enable regular user access to the database. 13.
Open Enterprise Architect Ultimate edition, connect to the Pro Cloud model with highest Visibility Level (as 14.
defined in step 12) and set the Visibility Level on all Packages to their required values.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 299 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
User Guide
The functionality of the Visibility Levels feature is primarily restricted to System Administrators, in order to set up and
configure models to limit access to certain Packages in a model. Generally, users will not be aware of Visibility Levels;
they simply will not see certain Packages in the model.
Defining Visibility Level Aware Database Managers
For the most part, defining Database Managers in the Professional ('Pro Cloud') version of Sparx Systems Cloud Service
Configuration Client is the same process as for the regular version. These are the exceptions:
DBMSDiscussion
Orac
leAll Oracle connections require a 'DefaultSchema={schema_name};' option manually added to the
connection string, where {schema_name} is the physical name of the schema that owns the Enterprise
Architect tables. For example:
   Provider=OraOLEDB.Oracle.1;Password=pass;Persist Security Info=True;User ID=user1;Data
Source=ORA_SN;DefaultSchema=owner_user;
In a typical Oracle connection to an Enterprise Architect model the 'User ID' option is both the owner of
the tables and the user credentials that are being used to access the data. However, in a model using the
Visibility Levels feature, these options are different, so the 'DefaultSchema' option has been added to
define the table owner.
Micr
osoft
SQL
Serv
erAll SQL Server connections require an 'Alias' field value that uniquely identifies the database manager on
the current server. The 'Alias' value is the name by which Enterprise Architect users know the model.
In previous versions of the Cloud Service, the database manager alias for SQL Server-based connections
was automatically determined by the database name, which meant that each SQL Server database could
only ever have one database manager defined in the Cloud Service. Now with the use of the 'Alias' field a
single database can have an unlimited number of database managers defined.
Enabling the Extended OLSC Interface on a Database Manager
In order for the Pro Cloud Server to allow the use of Visibility Levels in a model the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC,
WebEA and Integration)' option must be selected. This is achieved by opening the Sparx Systems Cloud Services
Configuration Client application (SSProCloudClient.exe) connecting to the appropriate server. You then select the
database manager in the list and click on the Configure button. On the resulting Configure Database Manager screen
select the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, WebEA and Integration)' checkbox.
Visibility Level Administration
When the Ultimate edition of Enterprise Architect is used to connect to a model that has Visibility Levels configured,
there is an additional menu item, 'Set Visibility Level...' available under the 'Package Control' context menu of each
Package object in the Project Browser.
If your model has security enabled, then all application users that require access to the 'Set Visibility Level...' menu item
will need to be allocated the 'Visibility Level Admin' or 'Administer Database' security permission, using standard
Enterprise Architect permission assignment.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 300 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set a Package's Visibility Level
From within the Ultimate edition of Enterprise Architect, the Visibility Level of a Package can be set using the Project
Browser context menu item 'Package Control | Set Visibility Level...'.
This menu item will only be available in models that have been set up for Visibility Levels, are being accessed via a Pro
Cloud server connection and the user has a Ultimate License.
Once a Visibility Level has been set on a Package, that Package and all of its children can be viewed, accessed and
updated only by users with the corresponding access level.
To remove a visibility level from a Package (and all its children), simply set the Visibility Level back to unrestricted.
Visibility Levels users can apply
Users can only set the Visibility Levels on Packages to levels the current database user has access to. For example, an
Enterprise Architect client connected to a Cloud connection that uses a database user that has been assigned levels 3 & 4
can update the Visibility Level of any Package to the levels unrestricted, 3 or 4.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 301 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Troubleshooting
'Set Visibility Level' menu is not available
The 'Set Visibility Level' menu item can be hidden from users for a number of reasons:
You are not connecting to the model via a Cloud connection ·
You are not using Enterprise Architect release 14 (or above) ·
You are not using the Ultimate edition of Enterprise Architect ·
The Cloud Server you are connected to has an expired license and is now operating as the free edition ·
The model you are connecting to is NOT Oracle or MS SQL Server based ·
The model in the Cloud Server you are connecting to is not configured with the 'Enable Pro Features (OSLC, ·
WebEA and Integration)' option
The model you are connecting to has not been configured/adjusted for Visibility Levels (that is, the update script has ·
not been run against the database)
The currently logged on application user has not been granted access to the 'Visibility Level Admin' Enterprise ·
Architect security permission.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 302 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Additional Functionality Using the Cloud
The Cloud Services provides the facility of connecting to models over a secure http connections (HTTPS). It also makes
it possible to use these additional facilities on or within your models:
Open Services for Lifecycle Collaboration (OSLC) ·
Reusable Asset Service (RAS) ·
Scheduled Tasks ·
OSLC
OSLC is an initiative to provide easier integration between Requirement Management tools. It uses HTTP to list, add,
modify and delete requirements. The service provider definition to direct any OSLC client to is:
    <protocol>://<server>:<port>/<model_name>/oslc/sp/
For example, if you were connecting to a server running on your own machine using the default settings, the connection
would be:
    http://localhost:804/model/oslc/sp/
OSLC v2
With the release the Pro Cloud Server a second OSLC interface was introduced which provides external tools access to a
much greater range of Enterprise Architect information. This new version is referred to as OSLC Architecture
Management. The base URL for OSLC v2 is :
    <protocol>://<server>:<port>/<model_name>/oslc/am/
For example, if you were connecting to a server running on your own machine using the default settings, the connection
would be:
    http://localhost:804/model/oslc/am/
Reusable Asset Service (RAS)
The RAS portion of the Cloud Server helps you to define Packages that can be used in any model. When a Package is
requested, Enterprise Architect and the Cloud Server will track cross-Package dependencies and make available
everything required by that Package.
Scheduled Tasks
The Cloud Server includes optional support for running time-based updates to data. Currently, this is applied to updating
a Time Series chart automatically to provide a dynamic view of how a model is changing over time. You can set different
time scales for these updates, such as daily, weekly or monthly.
Notes
This facility is available through the Corporate, Unified or Ultimate editions ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 303 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 304 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cloud Server Troubleshooting
Browser Test
For a simple check that the Cloud Service is operating on the specified Ports defined in the configuration file, you can
enter this address into a web browser:
    <protocol>://<machineName>:<port>
For example, on the Cloud Server:
    http://localhost:804/
Or
    https://sparxcloud.com
If the port is enabled this message is returned:
    Sparx Systems Cloud Server
    Congratulations, your server is now ready to host your models. Connect through the
    configuration client to add or remove models.
If this message is not displayed, confirm the server and port name, check for other services listening on the specified port
and check the server log file for error messages.
Errors shown in Enterprise Architect System Output
Error Message Meaning
HTTP Status 401 Access
DeniedIndicates a failure to authenticate with the server.
With the built-in web server, this error will occur if an invalid username or
password was provided, or no username or password were provided.
HTTP Status 403 Indicates an attempt to access a model that is marked on the server as 'Require
authenticated and secure connection'.
This might indicate that you are connecting using an http protocol instead of https,
or that the port you are using is not providing authentication to the model you are
connecting to.
Check that you are using https.
Check with the system administrator that the security authentication option is
pointing to a model with security enabled.
HTTP Status 500 Unable to
connect to serviceThe connection is not being accepted.
Check the server name ·
Check the firewall settings on the client and server ·
Check the ports the server is listening on ·
The database manager for
this database was shut
downEnterprise Architect established a connection to a Cloud Service, and requested to
connect to a known repository, but the repository is currently disabled.
Ask your system administrator to check the 'Enabled' option for the database in
question.
There is no database Enterprise Architect established a connection to a Cloud Service, but the model
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 305 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
manager configured for the
requested repositoryname requested does not match any defined database on the server.
When accessing the model via Cloud Connection, ensure that the Model Name
which is entered matches the Alias which is shown in the Cloud Configuration
Client.
Unable to connect to
DatabaseEnterprise Architect established a connection to a Cloud Service and requested to
connect to a known repository; however, when the server attempted to open a
connection to the database using the supplied details, it failed.
Note: Whenever this error occurs, a Warning-level message that contains more
detailed information will be written to the Cloud Server logs.
If the repository is:
Using ODBC, ask your System Administrator to check that an ODBC ·
connection is defined as a System DSN (and not a User DSN) on the server,
that all connection parameters are correct, and that the database username and
password have been saved into the ODBC DSN or the connection string
Oracle, ask your System Administrator to verify that the user name and ·
password were saved with the connection string and that all other options in the
connection are correct
SQL Server connecting via OLE DB and Windows authentication, ask your ·
System Administrator to verify that the user name the Cloud Service is running
under has been granted permission to the SQL Server database (at a minimum
it will need the roles db_datareader and db_datawriter) and that all other
options in the connection are correct
SQL Server connecting via OLE DB and SQLServer authentication, ask your ·
System Administrator to verify that the defined user name has been granted
permission to the SQL Server database (at a minimum it will need the roles
db_datareader and db_datawriter), that the option to save the password with the
connection string was enabled, and that all other options in the connection are
correct
After Reinstall Enterprise
Architect no longer worksYour environment was working correctly, then you updated to the latest version of
the Cloud Server and now Enterprise Architect clients are not able to connect to
your Cloud models.
During the reinstall process the Cloud Server installer actually uninstalls the
original version and then installs the new one. As a result of this the Firewall
exception that is automatically added by the installer is removed and re-created.
The problem with this is if someone manually adjusted the Firewall exception (after
the original install) any manually changes are lost when the installer re-creates the
Firewall exception. One method of stopping this from occurring in the future is to
create a completely new firewall exception (with a different name) that is a copy of
the one created by the installer, and make any manual changes to that exception.
Reading Server Logs
As mentioned earlier the Sparx Systems Cloud Service is a Windows Services application and as such it needs to
conform to some basic rules. When it comes to troubleshooting the most important rule for Services is that they can be
run independently of user input/interaction and as such do not contain screens/GUI of any kind. For this reason the Sparx
Systems Cloud Service writes any potential message to Log files.
The Cloud Service configuration file contains a number of settings that control where, how many and how large log files
can be. By default the Cloud Service will save all log files to a \Logs\ folder under \Services\ (C:\Program Files
(x86)\Sparx Systems\Cloud Services\Service\Logs), and it will keep up to 3 files. A new file will be created whenever
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 306 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
the Cloud Service is started or whenever the maximum file size if reached. Filename 'SparxCloudServicesLog-1.log' will
always be the most recent log file and each time a new file is created the older ones are renamed by increasing the
number. ie SparxCloudServicesLog-2.log is renamed to SparxCloudServicesLog-3.log.
The configuration file also contains a setting that controls the level of logging that is performs, see the logging related
options in 'Extended Server Properties' for more details. When troubleshooting, it is recommended that the Cloud
Services LOG_LEVEL property be set to the highest level, SYSTEM.
Each log entry will consist of the Time, Log Level and Message, if an error occurs the Message will normally contain a
description of the problem and from this the appropriate action can be undertaken.
Log Message Explanation
Log File Header Each time new Log file is created the Cloud Service will write out a summary of
the main settings, this information is particular useful if you are requesting support
from Sparx Systems.
Started database managers When a Cloud Service is initially started, and the Log Level is set to INFO (or
lower) it will log out a summary of each configured model which includes the
connection string of the model.
    [INFO]: Added database manager - ConnectionStr: 'eaexample ---
Connect=Provider=MSDASQL.1;...
If the Log level is lower than INFO, additional log entries will be written for each
model, for example:
    [SYSTEM]: SUCCESS Started database manager
firebird:anonymous@eaexample
House keeping The Cloud Service performs regular 'house keeping' tasks, the frequency of which
is controlled by the AUDIT_TIME_PERIOD setting in the Cloud Service
configuration file.
When the log level is set to INFO, each time house keeping is performed the Cloud
Service will log out a summary of connections for each defined database manager
and report how many are currently available, the maximum number used concurrent
and total number of uses since the last audit.
     [AUDIT] firebird:anonymous@eaexample       | Free:  0 | Max Active:  3 |
Acquisitions:   192 |
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 307 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Normally these entries can be ignored as they are purely reference information
only.
Open port list When a Cloud Server is initially started, and the Log Level is set to SYSTEM, it
will log out a success message for each configured port, which includes the
management port (803) and any http/https ports, you should see a line such as:
    [SYSTEM] SUCCESS Bound and listening on port 804.
If the log file is missing any lines, or if the message doesn't read 'SUCCESS' this
might indicate a problem with the server port.
A common error here is:
    Unable to create secure server on port 443.
Possible causes of this are:
Certificate/Private Key file not found at C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx ·
Systems\Cloud Services\Service\server.pem
The server.pem file does not contain a valid certificate and private key ·
Certificate Authority file not found or invalid at C:\Program Files (x86)\Sparx ·
Systems\Cloud Services\Service\cacert.pem
Unable to connect to
databaseDuring operation, the server will write to the log file any failed attempts to open a
model. This will generally not occur until a user attempts to connect to the
database. Errors that can occur here are:
    REQUEST_CONNECT FAIL. Error (5): Unable to connect to database
This means that the server attempted to open a connect but it failed. If you see this
message, review the list of potential reasons outlined in the Errors shown in
Enterprise Architect System Output table.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 308 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Reuseable Asset Service (RAS)
Within a large organization, groups of users can be separated by geographical distance be on different networks. This can
make it difficult to share common data, standards and modeling structures, without the complexity of using external
Version Control tools or manually distributing XMI files between projects. Enterprise Architect has a Reusable Asset
Service (RAS) that provides a simple and convenient mechanism for modelers to distribute or download reusable model
structures, information, corporate directives and standards. The shared repository is accessible via a Cloud Service
connection, making it accessible for distributed teams. The person who sets up the reusable data can retain governance of
the resource or asset, whilst users of the service can easily review the currency of the information and download the
latest versions into their models or file folders.
The RAS gives distributed teams convenient access to a single 'source of truth' for shared data, including project
milestones, architectural frameworks and industry standards.
Reusable Assets
Reusable Assets consist of:
Packages containing elements, diagrams and structures (as drawn from any point within the Project Browser), and ·
Files in a range of text, code and graphic formats, including .eap files ·
An asset can be, for example:
A common Class library or framework ·
A set of common Requirements or Use Cases ·
A draft specification document ·
Marketing collateral ·
Storage Structure and Use
Reusable Assets are held in a remote registry, accessed through a Cloud Service connection. The registry contains any
number of Storages, which can either be left unprotected for any user to create, or change-restricted by an Administrator
password. Each Storage can contain any number of Asset Packages holding modeling structures, and files containing
textual or graphical information and data. When a user creates a Storage, they can protect the contents from being
updated in the Registry or downloaded into a model, using password protection defined by that user.
For each Package, the RAS automatically identifies the:
Version of the Package held in the registry ·
Diagrams and elements (including child Package elements) contained by the Asset Package ·
Dependencies on parent Packages of any external elements that the Asset Package references ·
Dependencies on MDG Technologies ·
Any user, regardless of password protection, can freely browse and identify the contents of a Package held in a Storage -
including displaying the diagrams - without importing the material into a model. A user that has imported an Asset
Package into their model can compare their model Package against any version of the Asset Package, to check for and
assess any differences between them.
Notes
The Reusable Asset Service is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 309 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connect to the Asset Service
The Reusable Asset Service provides model structures and documents to you from one or more registries on remote
systems. You access these registries through a Cloud connection to the appropriate server. The connection details should
be provided to you by your System Administrator or Reusable Asset Service Administrator.
Access
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Connect to Assets
Option Detail
Registry This field normally defaults to the last-used registry name. If the field is empty, or
if you want to switch to a different registry, click on the 
  button to the right of
the field.
The 'Cloud Connection' dialog displays.
Using the information provided by your administrator, type in the server name,
URL and the name of the model hosting the registry data. For example, if you
wanted to download the UBL Frameworks into your model, you would specify the
server 'sparxcloud.com' and the model name 'modelpatterns'.
If advised by your Administrator, type in the user name and password for the
server.
Click on the OK button; the 'Registry' field now shows the server name.
Storage If there is more than one Storage available in the Registry, this field defaults to the
first listed in the Registry.
To check for or select other Storages, click on the drop-down arrow at the right of
the field. Click on the Storage to review. For example, if you were downloading
UBL frameworks, you would select 'UBL' in the list.
The 'Registry Browser' tab displays the Packages registered in the selected Storage.
Notes
The Reusable Asset Service is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 310 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Browse Assets
When you select a Storage in the Reusable Asset Service, the 'Registry Browser' tab immediately displays a list of the
Packages registered in that Storage. You can review and use these Packages using the context menu and buttons on the
tab.
You can review the properties and contents of the selected Package in the Storage, and access any files in the Storage,
using the tabs in the lower half of the Reusable Asset Service view, underneath the 'Registry Browser' tab.
If you have left the Registry Browser open for a while and there is a possibility that the Registry has been changed, you
can click on the 
  icon in the Reusable Asset Service toolbar to refresh the Browser with the latest contents of the
Registry.
Access
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets > Registry Browser
Review Assets
Option Detail
Toggle Filter Bar Right-click on the column headings and select this option to show or hide the Filter
Bar on the display.
<filter bar fields> Type in the appropriate characters to list only Packages that have that string of
characters in the values in the corresponding column.
Package This column shows the name of the Packages held in the selected Storage.
Version This column defaults to the most recent version of each Package held in the
selected Storage.
You can click on the drop-down arrow at the end of a field and select a different
version of the corresponding Package, if any have been registered.
Last Registered This column shows the date and time at which the currently-listed version of each
Package was registered.
Registered By This column shows the user name of the person who registered the currently-listed
version of each Package.
Import Click on a Package name and click on this button to begin to import either the
Package alone or the Package and its dependent structures into your model.
You can perform the same action by right-clicking on the Package name and
selecting the 'Import from Registry' menu option.
If the Package from the Registry already exists in your model, it is deleted and
replaced by this import.
For a:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 311 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
'Learning Center Library' Storage, the 'Download Library' dialog displays ·
'Reference Data Library' Storage, the 'Import Reference Data' dialog displays ·
'Source Code Library' Storage, the 'Save As' dialog displays ·
Compare with Package in
ModelIf you have previously imported a Package from the Registry into your model, you
can right-click on the Package name in the Registry Browser and select this option
to compare the imported Package with the Registry version, and show any
differences.
The system automatically selects the model Package from the Project Browser.
Find in Project Browser If you have previously imported a Package from the Registry into your model, you
can right-click on the Package name in the Registry Browser and select this option
to highlight the corresponding Package in the Project Browser.
Notes
Some of the other options available on the Registry Browser are used to set up assets in the Registry ·
If the Storage is password-protected, a prompt for you to enter a password displays when you select to perform an ·
operation on the data; in this situation, you need the 'Read-only' password to process the information from the
Storage, and the 'All-access' password to change the information in the Storage
The 'Registry Browser' tab will be empty for a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code ·
Library' type Storage - the contents of these Storages will be available in the 'Storage Files' tab of the Reusable Asset
Service view
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 312 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Asset Properties
When you select a Storage and a Package in the Registry Browser, the first four tabs in the lower half of the Reusable
Asset Service view are updated with information from the Package. The 'Asset Properties' tab is a read-only view of the
properties of the selected Package itself.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window using one of the methods outlined here.
Select a Package, then click on the 'Asset Properties' tab to display properties for that Package.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Review Package Properties
Field Detail
Package Displays the name of the selected Package.
GUID Displays the Global Unique Identifier of the Package.
Version Displays the version reference (such as 1.1 or Beta) of the Package.
Author Displays the user ID of the person who created the Package (the Package Author).
Created Date Displays the date and time at which the selected version of the Package was created
(that is, registered) in the Registry.
Modified Date Displays the date and time at which the selected version of the Package was last
modified (that is, re-registered) in the Registry.
Comments Displays any comment recorded against the Package when it was registered in the
Storage.
Notes Displays the notes recorded against the Package when it was registered in the
Storage.
Notes
The 'Asset Properties' tab will be empty for a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' and 'Source Code ·
Library' type Storage
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 313 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Package Contents
When you select a Storage and a Package in the 'Registry Browser', the first four tabs in the lower half of the Reusable
Asset Service view are updated with information from the Package. The 'Contents' tab lists the diagrams and elements
(including child Packages) held in the selected Package, listing the two types of object separately. You can organize the
information within a column into alphabetical or reverse-alphabetical order for ease of reference, and use the Filter bar to
filter the display to show only items with values containing specific characters or digits.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window using one of the methods outlined here.
Select a Package, then click on the 'Contents' tab, to display the contents of that Package.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Review Package Contents
Option Detail
Content Type Click on this button to toggle between listing the Package diagrams first and listing
the Package elements first.
Toggle Filter Bar Right-click on the column headings and select this option to show or hide the Filter
Bar on the display.
<filter bar fields> Type in the appropriate characters to list only elements and diagrams that have that
string of characters in the values in the corresponding column.
Content Type: Diagram
Content Type: ElementThese are the headers for the two types of object listed in this tab.
Click on the appropriate expansion box to hide or show the list of diagrams or
elements under the heading.
Name Displays the name of the element or diagram available in the Package.
Type Displays the type of the element or diagram, such as UseCase or Use Case diagram.
GUID Displays the Global Unique Identifier of the element or diagram.
Content Type Displays the object type of the item - Element or Diagram.
Find in Project Browser Right-click on an element or diagram line and select this option to see if the
element or diagram also exists in your model and, if it does, to highlight it in the
Project Browser.
View Diagram Right-click on a diagram name and select this option to display the diagram within
a labeled frame, as an image.
Alternatively, double-click on the diagram name.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 314 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
The 'Contents' tab will be empty for a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code Library' ·
type Storage
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 315 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Package Dependencies
A Package held as an asset in the Reusable Asset Service registry might contain elements and diagrams that have
relationships with objects in other Packages. The Packages containing these 'external' objects will also have been added
to the Registry to support the first Package, and will be listed in the 'Registry Browser' tab along with other (unrelated)
Packages. You can establish whether the selected Package in the Registry Browser has links to other Packages in the
Registry, and which they are, by reviewing the 'Dependency' tab.
Package A depends on Package B if any of these constructs (or their Tagged Values) in Package A references elements
in Package B:
Elements ·
Attributes ·
Operations ·
Operation Parameters ·
Diagrams ·
Connectors ·
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window using one of the methods outlined here.
Select a Package, then click on the 'Dependency' tab, to display a list of Dependencies for that Package.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Check Package Dependencies
Option Detail
Package Displays the name of the related Package.
Version Displays the latest registered version of the related Package that has links to the
selected Package.
GUID Displays the Global Unique Identifier of the related Package.
Find in Project Browser Right-click on the 'Package' line and select this option to see if the Package also
exists in your model and, if it does, to highlight it in the Project Browser.
Notes
If one Package depends on another, and that second Package itself depends on another Package, both the second and ·
third Packages are shown in the 'Dependency' tab
The 'Dependency' tab will be empty for a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code ·
Library' type Storage
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 316 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 317 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Package Technologies
It is possible that the asset Package in the Registry is associated with one or more Technologies, especially if the Package
comes from a model developed as an extension or customization of the UML. You can check whether an asset Package
has any associated Technologies, and what they are, by viewing the 'Technology' tab of the Reusable Asset Service view.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window using one of the methods outlined here.
Select a Package, then click on the 'Technology' tab, to display a list of Technologies required to support that Package.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Review Technologies
Option Detail
Name Displays the name of the Technology as recorded in the Registry.
Version Displays the required version of the Technology to support the asset Package,
available through the Registry.
ID Displays the unique identifier of the Technology.
Type Identifies whether the Technology is system-supplied and built in to Enterprise
Architect (such as BPMN 2.0 or ArcGIS), or user-defined.
A user-defined technology can be introduced from an external source or developed
by a user within the system.
Registry Status Indicates whether the Technology file is:
Available - the Technology file is registered in the current Storage, or ·
Unavailable: ·
    - The Technology file is not registered in the Storage, or
    - The Technology is a built-in Technology and is already integrated
        with your system, or must be purchased under license, or
    - The Technology is available from a URL and can be downloaded
        from that URL
Import Technology If your local system does not have one of the Available Technologies, you can
quickly import it from the Registry.
Right-click on the Technology name and select the 'Import Technology' option. 1.
A prompt displays for you to confirm the import to your system; click on the 2.
Yes button.
A message displays to confirm that the Technology has been imported; click on 3.
the OK button.
You might have to restart Enterprise Architect to activate the Technology.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 318 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Other than the remote Technologies, you cannot import a Technology flagged as
'Unavailable'. You can import a remote Technology from its URL site.
Notes
You can also import Available Technologies from the registry as part of the process of importing the asset Package ·
If the Storage is password protected, a prompt to enter your password displays (this can be a Read-Only or a ·
Complete Access password) after you confirm that you want to import the Technology; you cannot import the
Technology without this password
The 'Technology' tab will be empty for a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code ·
Library' type Storage
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 319 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Storage Files
The 'Storage Files' tab of the Reusable Asset Service view simply lists the files that have been uploaded to the specified
Storage. The files can be of any type, uploaded from any directory on any system connected to the registry. Typically
they would be document or graphics files that provide standards, guidelines or design information on a model structure.
The tab displays the file name and extension, and a comment on the nature or purpose of the file.
Files held in the Registry are compressed, so to view the contents you download them onto your local system.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window using one of the methods outlined here.
Select a Package, then click on the 'Storage Files' tab to display a list of files associated with the Package, that are
available for download.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Review files in Draft/Complete type Storage
On the 'Storage Files' tab, check the 'Comments' field against each file that interests you.
To view the contents of a file, right-click on the file name and select the 'Import From Registry' option. The 'Save As'
browser displays, through which you select the directory into which to copy the file.
Click on the Open button. The file is copied into the selected location, from which you can open it.
Review files in Learning Center/Reference Data/Source Code Library type Storage
On the 'Storage Files' tab, check the 'Comments' field against each file that interests you.
To import and install a Library file, right-click on the file name and select the 'Import From Registry' option. One of
these dialogs will display:
'Download Libraries' dialog for a 'Learning Center' type Storage ·
'Import Reference Data' dialog for a 'Reference Data Library' type Storage ·
'Save As' dialog for a 'Source Code Library' type Storage ·
'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' and 'Source Code Library' type Storages do not contain any Assets.
Therefore, clicking on the:
'Import' button in the Registry Browser will import and install a Library file from the Storage ·
'Delete' button in the Registry Browser will delete all Library files in the Storage ·
Notes
If the Storage is password-protected, the system prompts you to enter a password before you begin importing a file ·
from the Storage; in this case you require either a 'Read-Only' or a 'Complete Access' password
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 320 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Compare an Asset to the Model
If you are developing a Package in your model against a standard structure, or using common elements from the
Reusable Asset Service, you can check that your model conforms to the standard or incorporates any changes to the
common elements, by performing a comparison between the asset Package and your model.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window using one of the methods outlined here.
Select a Package, then right-click on the Package and choose 'Compare with Package in Model'.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Compare Asset Package and Model
A prompt displays for you to confirm the comparison. Click on the Yes button.
The Baseline Comparison view displays, showing the element hierarchy in which differences have been detected
between the Package in the model and the asset Package in the Registry (as the Baseline).
All facilities of the standard Baseline Comparison are available, including the ability to 'roll back' differences so that the
element or Package in the model matches the Registry.
Notes
If the Storage is password-protected, the system prompts you to enter a password before you begin comparing ·
information in the Storage and in the model; in this case you require either a Read-Only or a Complete Access
password
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 321 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Import an Asset into the Model
The Reusable Asset Service provides common or standard information and data that you can import into your local
model. The unit that you import is a selected version of the Asset Package; you can also, optionally, import:
Other Packages on which the selected Asset Package depends, and/or ·
Available Technologies that support full use of the model structures in the Asset Package ·
The Asset Package (with, if selected, any needed Packages) is imported into the currently-selected model Package in the
Project Browser, unless the Asset Package already exists anywhere else in the Project. In this case, the system locates the
existing Package and overwrites it with the imported Asset Package.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window, using one of the methods outlined here.
On the 'Registry Browser' tab, either;
Select an Asset Package and click on the Import button, or ·
Right-click on an Asset Package and select the 'Import from Registry' option ·
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Import Asset Package
Before selecting an Asset Package to import into your model, click on the 'Version' drop-down arrow and select the
appropriate version of the Package to import.
When you select to import an Asset Package into your model, a short menu displays from which you select to import:
The Package alone or ·
The Package with the related Packages on which it is dependent ·
A prompt then displays for you to confirm the import, and to warn you that if the Package already exists in the model, it
will be overwritten by the import. Click on the Yes button to continue, or the No button to cancel the import.
If the Storage is password protected, after you confirm the import a prompt displays for your 'Read-Only' or
'Complete-Access' password; enter this and click on the OK button.
The 'Import from Registry' dialog displays, followed by confirmation that the import of the Package or Packages is
complete. Click on the OK button.
If the Package depends on Technologies
If the Technologies associated with an Asset Package are not already on your system and/or enabled in your model,
during the display of the 'Import from Registry' dialog the 'Import Technology From Registry' dialog also displays.
Process this dialog as described.
Option Detail
Name Displays the name of the Technology as recorded in the Registry.
The checkbox against each name is selected by default. If you want to import one
technology but not another, deselect the checkbox of the technology to ignore.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 322 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Displays the required version of the Technology to support the Asset Package,
available through the Registry.
Registry Status Indicates whether the Technology file is:
Available - the Technology file is registered in the current Storage, or ·
Unavailable - for one of these reasons: ·
    - The Technology file is not registered in the Storage, or
    - The Technology is a built-in Technology and is already integrated with
your system, or must
       be purchased under license, or
    - The Technology is available from a URL and can be downloaded from that
URL
Model Status Indicates whether the Technology is already in your model and disabled.
(If the Technology is in your model and enabled, there is no need to import it and it
is not listed in the dialog.)
OK Click on this button to import and/or enable the selected Technology or
Technologies in your system.
A status message displays to indicate that the Package and Technologies have been
imported and the Technologies enabled. You might have to restart Enterprise
Architect for the Technologies to take full effect.
Click on the OK button to clear the message.
In the Project Browser, the Package has been added to the model with (if selected)
the Packages on which it is dependent.
Import Library
The Reusable Asset Service provides the ability to store Library files that you can import into your local model. The type
of Library file available in a Storage will depend on the Storage type. When you import and install a Library from a:
Learning Center Library storage, it will be available for use on all Enterprise Architect models in this system ·
Reference Data Library storage, it will be installed into the current model ·
Source Code Library storage, it will be saved in the specified location in the file system ·
Library from a Learning Center Library storage. Either:
Click on the Import button to open the 'Download Libraries' dialog, showing all the Library files in this storage as ·
selected, or
Right-click on a Library file in the 'Storage Files' tab and select the 'Import from Registry' option to open the ·
'Download Libraries' dialog showing that specific Library file as selected
Library from a Reference Data Library storage. Either:
Click on the Import button to open the 'Import Reference Data' dialog, showing all the reference data in that Library ·
file as selected, or
Right-click on a Library file in the 'Storage Files' tab and select the 'Import from Registry' option to open the 'Import ·
Reference Data' dialog, showing all the reference data in that Library file as selected
Library from a Source Code Library storage. Either:
Click on the Import button to open the 'Save As' dialog and select a location in the file system to save the imported ·
Library to, or
Right-click on a Library file in the 'Storage Files' tab and select the 'Import from Registry' option to open the 'Save ·
As' dialog, then select a location in the file system to save the imported Library to
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 323 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the Storage is password protected, a prompt for you to enter your 'Read-Only or 'Complete-Access' password displays.
Enter the password and click on the OK button.
Notes
You can also import Technologies separately from the Package that is dependent on them, using the 'Technology' tab ·
of the Reusable Asset Service view
'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' and 'Source Code Library' type Storages do not contain any ·
Asset Packages
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 324 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set Up Registry Password
As a System Administrator, you can password-protect the Registry server to prevent users from modifying the Registry;
that is, restrict users from creating, modifying and deleting Storages. Once you have set password protection, only those
users who have a valid Administrator password can modify the Registry.
You can also change the password at regular intervals, for added security.
Access
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets : Set Administrator Password
Set the Administrator Password
Option Detail
Enter old password Disabled if no password exists for the Registry server.
If the server has a current password, type it in to this field.
New password Type in the new Administrator password.
Retype new Type in the new Administrator password, for confirmation.
OK Click on this button to set the password and close the dialog.
Cancel Click on this button to abort the changes and close the dialog.
Notes
To remove password protection from the Registry server, complete the 'Enter old password' field but leave the 'New ·
password' and 'Retype new' fields blank
If a Storage has a Complete Access password, then you can use either the Administrator password or the Complete ·
Access password to modify the Storage
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 325 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set Up the Asset Service
The process of setting up assets and files in the Reusable Asset Service has a number of simple stages, typically:
Identify the Registry ·
Create the Storages, including copying an existing Storage as a template for a new one ·
Set password protection on each Storage ·
Register the Asset Packages and Storage Files, and update them as necessary ·
Access
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Identify Registry
The Registry server holds the Storages of the Reusable Asset Service. It will have been previously configured by your
system administrator, to be accessed through a Cloud Connection. Your system administrator will provide the connection
details for you to use.
In the Reusable Asset Service view, click on the 
  button to the right of the 'Registry' field. The 'Cloud Connection'
dialog displays.
Using the information provided by your administrator, type in the server name, URL and the name of the model hosting
the registry data. If advised by your administrator, also type in the user name and password for the server.
Click on the OK button; the 'Registry' field now shows the server name.
Create Storages
A Storage is a container within the Registry, holding related assets and files. There can be several Storages in the
Registry, to support the different areas of work or purposes that your organization might define.
Step Action
1
Click on the 
  icon in the Reusable Asset Service toolbar.
2 If necessary, enter the Administration password that enables update access to the Registry. Click on the
OK button.
The 'New Storage' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Name' field, type a name that indicates the purpose or content of the Storage.
4 In the 'Type' field, select:
'Draft' if you intend to make significant changes to the content of the Storage, such as populating it ·
with assets and/or files; you can overwrite existing Packages or files in a Draft Storage
'Complete' if the Storage is ready for use; you cannot overwrite any Packages or files in a Complete ·
Storage, although you can delete Packages and files and add new ones
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 326 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
'Learning Center Library' if the Storage should contain only Enterprise Architect Learning Center ·
Library files - this Storage type can be populated only with Library files and not with Asset Packages;
you can overwrite existing Library files in a Learning Center Library storage
'Reference Data Library' if the Storage should contain only Enterprise Architect Reference Data ·
Library files - this Storage type can be populated only with Library files and not with Asset Packages;
you can overwrite existing Library files in a Reference Data Library storage
'Source Code Library' if the Storage should contain only Source Code Library files - this Storage type ·
can be populated only with Library files and not with Asset Packages; you can overwrite existing
Library files in a Source Code Library storage
You can modify a Storage at a later time, and change this Type setting.
5 If you want to set Storage Access Passwords on this Storage, click on the checkbox against one or both
password types, and provide and confirm the 'Complete Access' and/or 'Read-Only Access' passwords.
6 Click on the OK button.
A prompt displays for you to confirm the creation of the Storage, with the type of access you have set on
the Storage.
7 Click on the Yes button.
A confirmation message displays; click on the OK button.
The name of the new Storage displays in the 'Storage' field.
Password Protection
The Registry can be protected by a Registry password, so that only the Administrator can create and modify Storages. If
no Registry password is set, a second level of password protection can be applied.
The owner of a Storage can apply password protection to restrict users in processing and modifying the contents of the
Storage either intentionally or unintentionally. Password protection can be applied at two levels:
Complete Access - users enter their password and can modify or delete the Storage itself, and within the Storage can ·
register, update and delete Packages and files in the Registry, view Packages and import assets into their models
Read-Only Access - users enter their password and can import assets into their models ·
You set the 'Complete Access' password before you set the 'Read-Only Access' password.
If password protection is set and a user has no password, they can only view the contents of the Storage. If no password
protection is set, all users can freely access and modify the Storage and its contents.
You set the passwords on each Storage as you create that Storage, using the 'New Storage' dialog. Once the Storage has
been created, you can change or remove an existing password using the 'Modify Storage Access' dialog, but you cannot
add a password.
If a Storage is password protected, the system displays a prompt for the password when the user begins to:
Change or delete a password on the Storage ·
Copy the Storage to create a new Storage ·
Delete the Storage ·
Register a Package or file in the Storage ·
Import a Package, file or Technology from the Storage ·
Delete a Package or file from the Storage ·
Compare an Asset Package with a Package in the model ·
The system displays the password prompt when any of those operations is performed for the first time after the user:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 327 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Connects to a Registry ·
Reloads the Registry Browser ·
Selects a Storage in the 'Storage' field in the Reusable Asset Services view ·
If the user enters the correct password and therefore establishes their credentials, the system does not display a password
prompt again for any valid operation that user performs until they:
Select a different Storage in the 'Storage' field in the Reusable Asset Services view or ·
Reload the Registry Browser from the Registry ·
Register Assets and Files
Whilst a Storage exists and, if the Storage is under password protection, you have the 'Complete Access' password, you
can register Packages from a model and files from your system as assets in that Storage. If the Asset Package was
developed using one or more MDG Technologies, you can optionally register those technologies in the Storage as well.
See the Register New Assets Help topic.
Copy Storages
It is possible to copy a Storage as the basis for creating another Storage, for example if you want to use the same set of
assets in the context of larger set for a different department, work area or development phase.
Note: It is not possible to change the Type of a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code
Library' type Storage, nor is it possible to change a 'Draft' or 'Complete' type Storage into a 'Learning Center Library',
'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code Library' type Storage.
Step Action
1 In the 'Storage' field, select the Storage to be copied.
2
Click on the 
  icon in the Reusable Asset Service toolbar.
3 If necessary, enter the Administrator password or your 'Complete Access' password and click on the OK
button.
The 'Save Storage As' dialog displays.
4 In the 'Name' field, type a name that indicates the purpose or content of the new Storage.
5 In the Type field, select:
'Draft' if you intend to make significant changes to the content of the Storage, such as populating it ·
with assets and/or files; you can overwrite existing Packages or files in a 'Draft' Storage
'Complete' if the Storage is ready for use; you cannot overwrite any Packages or files in a 'Complete' ·
Storage, although you can delete Packages and files and add new ones
You can modify a Storage at a later time, and change this setting.
6 If you want to set Storage Access Passwords on this Storage, click on the checkbox against one or both
password types, and provide and confirm the 'Complete Access' and/or 'Read-Only Access' passwords.
7 Click on the OK button.
A prompt displays for you to confirm the creation of the Storage, with the type of access you have set on
the Storage.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 328 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
8 Click on the Yes button.
A confirmation message displays; click on the OK button.
The name of the new Storage displays in the 'Storage' field.
Change Storage Details
After you have set up a Storage, you can update it at a later stage to:
Change the status or Type ·
Change one or both of the existing 'Complete Access' and 'Read-Only' Access passwords ·
Delete one or both of the passwords ·
It is not possible to add a password where one has not previously been set.
You cannot change or delete passwords unless you have the 'Complete Access' password yourself.
Note: It is not possible to change the Type of a 'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code
Library' type Storage, nor is it possible to change a 'Draft' or 'Complete' type Storage into a 'Learning Center Library',
'Reference Data Library' or 'Source Code Library' type Storage
Step Action
1 On the Reusable Asset Service view, in the 'Storage' field click on the drop-down arrow and select the
Storage to update.
2
Click on the 
  icon in the Reusable Asset Service view toolbar.
3 If necessary, enter the Administrator password or your 'Complete Access' password and click on the OK
button.
The 'Modify Storage Access' dialog displays.
4 In the 'Type' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select:
'Complete' if the Storage has now been set up and is ready for use; you cannot overwrite any ·
Packages or files in the Storage, although you can delete them and add new Packages and files
'Draft' if you intend to make significant changes to the content of the Storage; you can overwrite ·
existing Packages or files
5 The 'Action' field defaults to 'None', to indicate no changes to the passwords. If you are changing or
deleting the passwords, click on the drop-down field and select:
'Change Password' to enable both password type fields ready for editing ·
'Remove Storage Access Password' to simply delete the 'Complete Access' password altogether ·
'Remove Read-Only Access Password' to simply delete the 'Read-Only Access' password altogether ·
6 If you have selected the 'Change Password' option, select the appropriate password checkbox or both
checkboxes, and type in the new password(s). Re-type the password(s) in the 'Confirm Password' field(s).
7 Click on the OK button to save your changes and close the 'Modify Storage Access' dialog.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 329 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Delete a Storage
If a Storage has been created by mistake, or is no longer necessary in the Registry, you can delete it and its entire
contents of Package and files in one action.
Step Action
1 On the Reusable Asset Service view, in the 'Storage' field click on the drop-down arrow and select the
Storage to delete.
2
Click on the 
  icon in the Reusable Asset Service view toolbar.
A prompt displays to confirm the deletion.
3 Click on the Yes button.
If necessary, enter the Adminstrator password or your 'Complete Access' password and click on the OK
button.
A message displays to confirm that the Storage has been deleted.
4 Click on the OK button to clear the message.
The Storage and its contents are cleared from the Registry.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 330 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Register New Assets
After you have set up your 'Draft' or 'Complete' Storages in the Reusable Asset Service Registry, you can register assets
in them. The assets include:
Packages of modeling structures, held in the Project Browser of your model; these Packages can include diagrams ·
and subordinate Packages
Any Packages containing model components on which the primary Asset Packages depend ·
Any MDG Technologies that you used in developing the Asset Packages, and that you decide to register with the ·
Packages
Any text or graphics files you want to make available to your corporate community; these files are compressed ·
before being added to the Storage
You register the first three items together. You can register files in the Storage during that same process, or separately.
You can register separate versions of the same Package. If you register a Package that already exists in the Registry
under the same version reference, and the Storage has 'Draft' status, the existing version is overwritten. If you register the
same Package with a different version number or reference, it is registered separately and users can access both versions
of the Package from the Registry.
'Learning Center Library', 'Reference Data Library' and 'Source Code Library' type Storages cannot contain Packages of
modeling structures - they can contain only Library files, which will appear in the 'Storage Files' tab. A Library file is :
a zipped file containing Enterprise Architect-specific Learning Center files for the 'Learning Center Library' Storage ·
type
an XML file containing Enterprise Architect-specific reference data XML files for the 'Reference Data Library' ·
Storage type
a zipped file containing source code files for the 'Source Code Library' Storage type ·
Once registered, the Library file will be available in the 'Storage Files' tab of the Reusable Asset Service view.
Access
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Register Package as Asset
Step Action
1 In the Reusable Asset Service view, select the appropriate Registry and Storage.
2 In the Project Browser for your model, click on the Package to register as an Asset.
3 On the 'Registry Browser' tab, click on the Register button.
If the Storage is password protected, a prompt displays for your 'Complete Access' password. Type this in
and click on the OK button.
4 The 'Register Package(s)' dialog displays, showing the:
Name and type of the Storage ·
Name and status of the selected Package (the status at this point being 'Pending') ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 331 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The name, GUID and current version of the selected Package; you can type a different version ·
number or text string if necessary
If there is a version of the Package already in the Registry, and the Storage has 'Draft' status, you can
either:
Overwrite the registered Package with an update of that version, or ·
Add the updated Package as another Asset under a different version number; in this case, the ·
'Packages to Register' panel shows the version number, registration date and comments on the latest
version of the Asset Package
You cannot overwrite an existing Package if the Storage has 'Complete' status. In this case, add the
Package under a different version number.
5 In the 'Comments' field type a short comment and, in the 'Notes' field, a longer explanation of the Package
being registered.
6 Click on the Check Dependency button and resolve the dependencies of the Package.
At the end of this process, the selected Package has the status 'Ready' (for registration).
7 You can, at this point, also register files as assets of the Storage. See Step 4 of the next table, Register File
as Asset.
However, if you prefer you can follow the complete procedure separate from registering Packages.
8 Click on the Register button.
A prompt displays to confirm registering the Package. Click on the Yes button.
If the same version of the selected Package already exists in the Registry (if the Storage is a 'Draft') a
prompt displays to confirm overwriting it. Click on the Yes button.
A progress dialog displays. If the Package does not have any associated MDG Technologies, a message
displays confirming that Package registration is complete. Go to step 10.
9 If the Package has one or more associated MDG Technologies, the 'Register MDG Technology' dialog
displays, listing the Technologies and prompting you to register (OK) or ignore all of them.
If you want to register some Technologies but not others, click on those you do not want to register, and
click on the Remove button for each one in turn.
Click on the OK button or Ignore button.
A message displays confirming that Package and Technology registration is complete.
Notes:
If a remote Technology is removed from registration (that is, the Technology is not registered along ·
with the Package), the registered Package will refer to this Technology at its URL
When importing the Package from Registry, the system will import this remote Technology from its
URL (if the remote Technology is not already available in the importing model)
If a remote Technology is registered with the Package being registered, the system will store a copy ·
of the Technology file in the Registry
When importing the Package from Registry, the system will import the Technology stored in the
Registry and will not import it from its URL (if the remote Technology is not already available in the
importing model)
10 Click on the OK button.
The 'Registry Browser' tab is updated with the newly-added details of the Package and any dependent
Packages. You can review the details on the tabs on the lower half of the Reusable Asset Service view.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 332 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Register File as Asset
Step Action
1 In the Reusable Asset Service view, select the appropriate Registry and Storage.
2 On the 'Registry Browser' tab, click on the Register button.
If the Storage is password-protected, a prompt displays for your 'Complete Access' password. Type this in
and click on the OK button.
The 'Register Package(s)' dialog displays.
3 If any Packages are listed in the 'Packages to Register' panel, and you do not want to re-register them,
clear the checkbox against each Package name.
4 Click on the Additional Files button.
The 'Select Additional Files' dialog displays.
5 Click on the Add button.
A 'Select' screen displays, on which you browse for and click on the required file. You can only select one
file at a time on this browser.
6 Click on the Open button.
The 'Add Comment' dialog displays.
7 Type a brief comment on the nature or purpose of the file in the Registry, and click on the OK button.
Focus returns to the 'Select Additional Files' dialog, which now lists the selected file.
8 Repeat steps 5-7 for each Asset file to register.
When you have finished, click on the OK button.
The 'Register Package(s)' dialog redisplays.
9 Click on the Register button.
A prompt displays to confirm registration of the files.
10 Click on the Yes button.
A 'Progress' dialog displays while the files are registered, followed by a message confirming that the
(Package and) File registration is complete.
11 Click on the OK button to clear the message, and to return focus to the Reusable Asset Service view.
You can review the files on the 'Storage Files' tab in the lower half of the view.
Register Learning Center Library
Step Action
1 In the Reusable Asset Service view, select the appropriate Registry and 'Learning Center Library' Storage.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 333 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
2 On the 'Registry Browser' tab, click on the Register button.
If the Storage is password protected, a prompt displays for your 'Complete Access' password. Type this in
and click on the OK button.
3 The 'Register Learning Center Library' dialog displays.
Click on the 
  button next to the 'File' field and select the Library file.
Type in a short comment on the Library being registered, in the 'Comments' field.
4 Click on the Register button.
A prompt displays to confirm registering the Library file. Click on the Yes button.
If the same Library file already exists in the Registry, a prompt displays to confirm overwriting it. Click
on the Yes button.
A progress dialog displays followed by a message confirming that Library registration is complete.
5 Click on the OK button.
The 'Storage Files' tab in the lower half of the Reusable Asset Server view is updated with the
newly-added Library file.
Register Reference Data Library
Step Action
1 In the Reusable Asset Service view, select the appropriate Registry and 'Reference Data Library' Storage.
2 On the 'Registry Browser' tab, click on the Register button.
If the Storage is password protected, a prompt displays for your 'Complete Access' password. Type this in
and click on the OK button.
3 The 'Register Reference Data Library' dialog displays.
Press the 
  button next to the 'File' field and select :
From File System – to select an existing Reference Data XML file from the file system ·
From Model – to open the 'Export Reference Data' dialog for selecting categories that will be ·
registered as the Reference Data Library once the Register button is clicked and a name is entered in
the 'Enter Reference Data File Name 'dialog
Type in a short comment for the Library being registered in the 'Comments' field.
4 Click on the Register button.
A prompt displays to confirm registering the Library file. Click on the Yes button.
If the same Library file already exists in the Registry, a prompt displays to confirm overwriting it. Click
on the Yes button.
A progress dialog displays followed by a message confirming that Library registration is complete.
5 Click on the OK button.
The 'Storage Files' tab in the lower half of the Reusable Asset Server view is updated with the
newly-added Library file.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 334 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Register Source Code Library
Step Action
1 In the Reusable Asset Service view, select the appropriate Registry and 'Source Code Library' Storage.
2 On the 'Registry Browser' tab, click on the Register button.
If the Storage is password protected, a prompt displays for your 'Complete Access' password. Type this in
and click on the OK button.
3 The 'Register Source Code Library' dialog displays.
Select the Library file by pressing the 
  button next to the 'File' field.
Type in a short comment for the Library being registered, in the 'Comments' field.
4 Click on the Register button.
A prompt displays to confirm registering the Library file. Click on the Yes button.
If the same Library file already exists in the Registry a prompt displays to confirm overwriting it. Click on
the Yes button.
A progress dialog displays, followed by a message confirming that Library registration is complete.
5 Click on the OK button.
The 'Storage Files' tab in the lower half of the Reusable Asset Server view is updated with the
newly-added Library file.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 335 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check Package Dependencies
As you register a Package in the Reusable Asset Service, the system provides a check on whether that Package is
dependent on any external content; that is, whether it links to any modeling component held in Packages other than its
own child Packages. You can perform three types of dependency check:
Complete, which will consider Package A to be dependent on Package B if Package A contains any element, ·
attribute, operation, operation parameter, diagram or connector (or their Tagged Values) that references elements in
Package B
Normative, which is the same as a Complete Dependency Check except that it will not treat as a dependency for ·
Package A any element from Package B that is added as a link on a diagram in Package A
Package Dependency/Import, where only those Packages that are the target of a Dependency/Package Import ·
connector from Package A will be treated as dependent Packages for Package A
You perform this dependency check as an integral part of the Asset Registration process (specifically, at step 6 of the
Register Package as Asset process). The check automatically identifies, firstly, the Packages directly needed by the Asset
Package, and then any Packages needed by those initial Packages, and so on until the needed Packages are not dependent
on any other.
In practice, such dependency chains are likely to be quite short. If you know that the original Asset Package is dependent
on two other Packages, one of which is subordinate to the other, you can simplify the process further by selecting the
Parent or Ancestor Package first and thus avoiding the extra steps of selecting the two Packages separately.
Access
Open the Reusable Asset Service window, using one of the methods outlined here.
In the Reusable Asset Service window, click on the 'Register' button ·
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets
Check Package Dependencies
Step Action
1 Select the appropriate Registry, Storage and version of the model Package to register, and provide any
appropriate comments or notes.
2 Click on the Check Dependency button.
If there are no Packages on which the Asset Package depends, the system sets that Package to 'Ready'. Go
to step 6.
The 'Select Needed Package: <dependent package name>' dialog displays, showing the model hierarchy
containing the Packages needed by the Asset Package. Each needed Package has a selected checkbox
against it.
If you know that a needed Package is a child or grandchild of another needed Package, click on the
checkbox next to the 'higher' Package name so that the child is validated as part of the parent. In this
example, if the Asset Package has dependencies on both External factors and Location, click on the
'External factors' checkbox to register both dependencies as External factors.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 336 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the needed Package is already registered in the Registry, it is indicated by a globe icon:
In this case, select the 'Use latest version of selected package in Registry (if available)' checkbox to link to
the registered version. For such Packages, no further dependency check is performed and, on the 'Register
Package(s)' dialog, the Package's Status is set to 'Ready'.
3 Click on the OK button.
The 'Register Package(s)' dialog updates to show the initial 'Asset Package status' as 'Ready', and to list
the needed Packages each with the status of 'Pending'.
4 Click on the Check Dependency button again.
If there are no Packages on which the needed Package depends, the system sets that Package to 'Ready'
and sets the focus on the next Pending Package. If there are no more Pending Packages, go to step 6.
If the needed Package is dependent on other Packages, the 'Select Needed Package: <dependent package
name>' dialog displays again, showing the model hierarchy containing those Packages, each with a
selected checkbox next to it. As in step 2, you can select a 'higher' Package if appropriate.
5 Click on the OK button.
The 'Register Package(s)' dialog updates to show the first needed Package status as 'Ready', and to list any
further needed Packages with the status of 'Pending.
6 If there are further needed Packages in the chain, repeat step 4. The system automatically identifies them
and lists them for validation as in step 5.
Otherwise the system sets the final needed Package status to Ready and you can continue to register files
and MDG Technologies.
Notes
A Package with status Pending cannot be registered; only Packages with status Ready can be registered ·
If you are certain that there are no parent-child relationships between the needed Packages, you can work through ·
these steps quickly by just clicking on the Check Dependency and OK buttons alternately until all Packages in the
Package to Register list have the status Ready
The system does not allow you to register an Asset Package that has dependencies on its own parent or grandparent ·
Package; such dependencies would cause the Asset Package to be registered twice - by itself and as part of the
parent Package - creating the risk of differences developing between the two instances
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 337 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Update an Asset
Over time, you might need to revise the contents of the Registry. Such updates can include:
Registering additional Asset Packages and files ·
Registering a new version of an Asset Package ·
Registering a new edition of a Storage file ·
Registering new Libraries ·
Deleting an Asset Package ·
Deleting a Storage file ·
Deleting a Library ·
Changing the details of a Storage ·
Deleting an entire Storage and the assets and files within it ·
Access
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Reusable Assets > Registry Browser
Update Tasks
Task Detail
Register new Asset
Packages and Storage filesYou can add further Asset Packages and files to a Storage at any time.
Register a new version of
an Asset PackageYou register a new version of an Asset Package as if it were a new Asset. In the
'Current Version' field on the 'Register Package(s)' dialog, you type a different
number or reference to that assigned to the currently-registered Asset.
You can overwrite an existing Asset Package under the same version number only
if the Storage has 'Draft' status. If the Storage has 'Complete' status, you cannot
overwrite the existing Asset Package under the same version number. To replace
the current version, you must delete the Asset from the Storage and register the
Package again.
Delete Asset Package from
StorageClick on the Package name in the 'Registry Browser' tab and either:
Click on the Delete button or ·
Right-click and select the 'Delete From Registry' menu option ·
In either case a short submenu displays, prompting you to select to delete:
The Asset Package only, or ·
The Asset Package and the Packages on which it is directly or indirectly ·
dependant
When you select the appropriate option, a prompt displays for you to confirm the
deletion.
Click on the Yes button. A message displays to confirm that the Package has been
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 338 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
deleted from the Registry, and the name of the Package is removed from the
'Registry Browser' tab.
If the Storage is password-protected, the system prompts you to enter a 'Complete
Access' password before it begins deleting the Package(s).
If any of the registered Packages depend on the Package being deleted, the system
displays the names of these Packages and prompts for confirmation before deleting
each Package.
Register a new version of a
Storage FileYou register a new version of a Storage file as if it were a new file under a different
file name.
You can overwrite an existing file under the same file name only if the Storage has
'Draft' status. If the Storage has 'Complete' status, you cannot overwrite the existing
file. To replace the current version, you must delete the file from the Storage and
register the file again.
Delete Storage Files from
StorageOn the 'Storage Files' tab, right-click on the file name and select the 'Delete From
Registry' option. A prompt displays for you to confirm the deletion.
Click on the Yes button. A status message confirms the deletion, the file is removed
from the Registry and the file name is removed from the 'Storage Files' tab.
If the Storage is password-protected, the system prompts you to enter a 'Complete
Access' password before it begins deleting the file.
Register a new Library File You can add further Library files to a Storage at any time.
When you register a Library file, the file name and location will be used as the
unique identifier for the file. You can overwrite this Library file in the Registry by
registering a file with the same name and from the same file system location.
Delete Library Files from
StorageTo delete all Library files in Storage, click on the Delete button in the 'Registry
Browser' tab.
To delete a particular Library file, right-click on the Library file name in the
'Storage Files' tab and select the 'Delete From Registry' option.
A prompt displays for you to confirm the deletion. Click on the Yes button. A status
message confirms the deletion, the Library file(s) is removed from the Registry and
the Library file(s) name is removed from the 'Storage Files' tab.
If the Storage is password-protected, the system prompts you to enter a 'Complete
Access' password before it begins deleting the Library file.
Change Storage Details This task is as documented for setting up the Registry. Note that whilst you can
copy a Storage as a new Storage, you cannot transfer assets directly between
existing Storages.
Delete a Storage and its
contentsThis task is as documented for setting up the Registry. Note that whilst you can
copy a Storage as a new Storage, you cannot transfer assets directly between
existing Storages.
Refresh Registry Browser If there is a possibility that another user has updated the Registry while you have
had it open, click on the 
  icon in the Reusable Asset Service toolbar to refresh
your display from the latest updates to the Registry.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 339 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Integrate Data from External Providers
The Pro Cloud Server helps you to integrate data from external providers into an Enterprise Architect Cloud model. A
variety of third-party providers can be connected to, including:
 Application Lifecycle Management (formerly HP Quality Center) ·
 Jazz (Rational DOORS Next Generation) ·
 Jira and 
  Confluence ·
 Team Foundation Server ·
 Wrike ·
 ServiceNow ·
 Autodesk ·
 Bugzilla ·
 SharePoint ·
 Dropbox and ·
 Other Enterprise Architect models ·
See the Install and Configure Help topic for information on how to configure each provider.
All integrations offer support for linking objects and elements from the external system into an Enterprise Architect
client. The Integration window supports browsing the external provider's items and retrieving lists of elements and
objects based on the provider's queries. Capabilities include:
Link an Enterprise Architect element to an external object ·
View external element properties ·
View and in some cases add to, external object discussions ·
Export links to WebEA URL's that correspond to the current model ·
Open external items in a web browser ·
Import elements ·
Export elements ·
From Enterprise Architect Release 14.1 it is possible to link a non-Cloud model to Integration Plugins configured on a
Pro Cloud Server.
See the Cloud Page Help topic for configuration options.
Access
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 340 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Ribbon Specialize > Tools > Integration
To view a list of all elements that are linked to external items:
Specialize > Tools > Integration > Show All Linked Items
Context Menu In a diagram or the Project Browser, for elements that are already linked to an
external item:
Right-click on element > Specialize > External Properties ·
Features
Feature Description
Pro Cloud Server
ConfigurationEach external provider needs to be configured on the Pro Cloud Server to enable
connection. Multiple configurations can be made for each provider (such as
connecting to two separate Jira servers).
Authorization If the Integration Provider requires authorization the user will be prompted to enter
their credentials. If the provider supports it, a new internet browser window will
open and prompt the user to log in to the Integration Provider and allow Enterprise
Architect access to its resources. Alternatively, a simple dialog will pop up asking
for the user's credentials, with the option to securely store these in the current
model. If stored in the model the credentials will only be used for the current user.
Navigate External Provider Find external items to link by navigating the external provider.
External Item Details Select an external item from the list to see its properties, notes and discussions.
Link External Items External items can be linked to Enterprise Architect as a generic
«ExternalReference» stereotype or as another element type.
Add WebEA Link Hyperlinks to WebEA can be added to the external item so that a user can quickly
open the WebEA element from the external source.
Right-click on a local linked element in the list and select 'Add WebEA Hyperlink
to External Object'. This will update the external item with a link to the WebEA
element that is linked to it. Note that not all provider types have a 'link' mechanism.
Where none exists, some providers might allow adding the link as a comment on
the item.
Ensure that the model has a valid WebEA address set in the model options.
Configuration Each integration provider comes with a set of default mapping values which
determines what type of local element is created in Enterprise Architect, as well as
which fields are copied to the new element. These mappings are configurable via
the 'Configure' option on the Integration window toolbar menu.
Users must have the 'Configure External Data Sources' permission to access this
functionality.
Troubleshooting The System Output window will show any errors while attempting to retrieve ·
data from the external providers
The Pro Cloud Server outputs log files for each external provider ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 341 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
'Integration' requires a Pro Cloud Server and is only available to Cloud models ·
'Integration' is currently provided with the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
If you select two or more elements at the same time, you can perform an operation on all of the selected elements at ·
once
For WebEA links to work a valid URL must be set for the WebEA address (see the Cloud Page Help topic) ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 342 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Navigate External Data
Each integration provider can be navigated through to show lists of external items that can be linked to Enterprise
Architect. Each provider might provide a slightly different mechanism for navigation based on how it stores its data.
Some provide a simple folder hierarchy, while others provide for user defined filters. See 'What data is returned by
Integration Plugins' on Install and Configure for details of each provider.
Navigate the Hierarchy
Begin navigation by selecting the provider type from the first drop-down menu.
Next, each provider type offers a slightly different navigation system; for example, Dropbox allows for browsing the
folder structure, whilst Jira give a list of projects followed by a list of user queries.
Item List
At each navigation level, if available, a list of items corresponding to the navigation level will populate the left-hand
panel.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 343 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Any local Enterprise Architect elements that are linked to the external item will be shown as a child of the external item.
All Items Linked to Model
At each navigation level there is an option to show all local Enterprise Architect elements that are linked to the selected
external data source. Select 'All Items Linked to Model' and choose a recent time period (7, 30 or 90 days, or 'All') to
show.
Choose 'All Items Linked to Model' on the root navigation level to see the linked items for all external providers.
This view is different to the regular list as it shows the local Enterprise architect element on top, and the external linked
item as a child of the local element. All the same context menu items are available in the view.
Show Items Linked to Current Context
In the integrations menu, select 'Items Linked to Current Context' to show only the external items that are linked to the
currently selected local element. That is, select an item in the Project Browser and see the external items that are linked
to it.
This view is the same as for 'All Items Linked to Model'.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 344 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
External Item Details
When an external item is selected in the list, the item's details are retrieved and displayed.
Properties
Select an external item from the list to view its External Properties. This window shows all available properties of the
external item, as defined by the external provider.
Properties that will be used when creating a linked local element are show in the top group 'Mapped Properties' while all
other properties are grouped in 'Other Properties'. The property mapping can be configured in Configuration.
Notes
The external item's notes or description is shown below the properties. Note that not all external providers have a notes
or description field.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 345 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Discussion
Select an external item from the list to view its External Discussions. This window shows the discussions or comments of
the external item.
New discussions can be posted by typing into the top box and pressing 'Send'. The username used will be that is
authorized on the Integration Provider. If generic credentials have been added to the server configuration then the local
model's user name will be added to the start of the comment as well.
Show or hide the discussions by clicking the icon in the top-right corner.
Note:
To post an external discussion the Integration Provider must be configured to allow this on the Pro Cloud Server ·
(allowed by default)
Not all external providers have discussions or comments ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 346 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Linking Items
Create Linked Element in Enterprise Architect
To create a new element in the Enterprise Architect model linked to the external item:
Right-click on an external item in the list. ·
Select Create Local Element ·
Select either the default type (see Configuration) or «External Reference» ·
Select which Package the element will be created in ·
Optionally add the new element to an open Diagram ·
The local element will be filled in with the values defined in the Field Mapping in Configuration.
Once linked, the local element will show under the external item:
Note: Select multiple items to create multiple elements at the same time. All elements will be created with either the
default type or «ExternalReference»
Link an Existing Enterprise Architect Element
An existing element in Enterprise Architect can be linked to an existing item in the external provider by dragging the
local element from the Project Browser and dropping it onto the external item.
Create a Linked Item in the External Provider
Existing local elements in Enterprise Architect can be added to the External Provider in this way:
Select the local Enterprise Architect element (in the Project Browser). 1.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 347 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Browse the external provider and select the required destination location. 2.
In the External Data Menu, select 'Create Linked Item'. 3.
Note:
To create a new external item, the Integration Provider must be configured to allow this on the Pro Cloud Server (it ·
is disallowed by default)
Not all providers allow for creation of new items ·
Update Local Element ('Pull' changes)
If either the local element or external item have been modified since the items were created or linked, an indicator will be
shown on top of the item's icon. Right-click on the linked Enterprise Architect element and select the 'Pull - Update
Local Element with External Data' option.
Note: If the local element has been modified since the link was created then its changes will be overwritten with the
external data.
Update External Item ('Push' changes)
If either the local element or external item have been modified since the items were created or linked, an indicator will be
shown on top of the item's icon. Right-click on the Enterprise Architect element and select 'Push - Update External Item
with Local Data'.
Note:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 348 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If the external element has been modified since the link was created then its changes will be overwritten with the ·
local data.
To update an external item the Integration Provider must be configured to allow this on the Pro Cloud Server ·
(disallowed by default).
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 349 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Configuration
Each integration provider comes with a set of default mapping values which determines what type of local element is
created in Enterprise Architect, as well as which fields are copied to the new element. These mappings are configurable
for each client model.
Permission
Users must have the 'Configure External Data Sources' permission to access this functionality.
Access
Integration window toolbar Menu > Configure
Type Mapping
This defines the element type that will be created when 'Create Local Element' is selected.
To create a new mapping, select the External Type, and use the toolbox selector to select the local element type.
Field Mapping
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 350 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
This defines the element type that will be created when 'Create Local Element' is selected.
To create a new mapping, select the External Type, and use the toolbox selector to select the local element type.
Notes
Each mapping can be reset to default values by clicking 'Reset to Defaults'. ·
If no type mapping is specified for a specific type, then the mapping for type 'Default' will be used. ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 351 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Change Management
As a repository is developed it will become the data store for valuable organizational information assets, and it is
imperative that this data is protected and maintained. Enterprise Architect has sophisticated tools to ensure the
information is protected, including full integration with all the leading Version Control Systems, Baselines that are
snapshots of your model that can be taken at important milestones, and Auditing that can track the finest changes to a
model. A Project Transfer function helps you to make backups of models without involving information technology
personnel. There are also Model Validation and Project Integrity Checkers to ensure the repository is maintained with a
clean bill of health, and a powerful role based Security System to ensure users can collaborate easily.
Facilities
Facility Detail
Version Control of
PackagesEnterprise Architect Model Version Control helps you to:
Coordinate sharing of Packages between users, with either read-only access or ·
update access, ensuring that work on different areas of the model is
coordinated and synchronous rather than conflicting
Save and retrieve a history of changes to Packages ·
To use Version Control in Enterprise Architect, you require a third-party
source-code control application such as:
Subversion ·
CVS·
MS Team Foundation Server (TFS), or ·
Any other Version Control product that complies with the Microsoft Common ·
Source Code Control standard
Tracking Changes Enterprise Architect provides two separate but complementary facilities for
tracking changes to data across the project:
Auditing of model changes ·
Baselining and differencing to capture and roll back changes ·
Project Data Transfer Enterprise Architect enables you to transfer project data between project data
repositories either for:
Sections of the project (XMI and CSV) or ·
The whole project, row by row, table by table (in the Corporate, Unified and ·
Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 352 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control
Within Enterprise Architect, you can manage changes to and revisions of your projects by placing individual model
Packages, view nodes or root nodes under Version Control. This provides numerous key facilities, including:
Saving a history of changes to Packages ·
The ability to retrieve previous revisions of Packages ·
Propagating model updates between team members ·
Coordinating the sharing of Packages between team members ·
You apply Version Control through a third-party source-code control application that manages access to and stores
revisions of the controlled Packages. Once the Version Control software has been installed and configured, you must
define a Version Control Configuration within your project. You can then use Version Control to manage changes to the
Packages of your model.
Notes
Sparx Systems strongly urge you not to manipulate Version Controlled Package files outside of Enterprise Architect; ·
it is possible to leave the Package files in a state that Enterprise Architect cannot recognize
Database replication should not be combined with Version Controlled Packages ·
If the Packages under Version Control contain any alternative images and those images are subject to frequent ·
change, you can set the 'Export alternate images' option on the 'Preferences' dialog to export the images to the
Version Control repository when you check in the Packages; if the images are not subject to frequent change, do not
select this option and instead use 'Export/Import Reference Data' to manage alternative images
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 353 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Introduction
Enterprise Architect's Version Control integration provides several key facilities, including:
Saving a history of changes made to your model's Packages ·
Retrieving previous revisions of Packages ·
Propagating model updates between team members ·
Coordinating the sharing of Packages between team members ·
The steps involved in setting up a Version Control environment and applying Version Control to an Enterprise Architect
project that is to be accessed by a number of users, are summarized in the Help topic Applying Version Control in a 
Team Environment.
There are a number of factors to consider when setting up and using Version Control in your model development.
Factors to consider
Factor Detail
System Requirements and
ConfigurationYou apply Version Control through a third-party source-code control application
that manages access to and stores revisions of the controlled Packages.
Typically the configuration consists of:
A server component that manages a Version Control repository, and ·
Client components on the workstations, that manage local working copies of ·
controlled files
Enterprise Architect uses the client component to communicate with the server. A
Version Control client must be installed on every machine where you run
Enterprise Architect and want to access your Version Control system.
Version Control Usage There are two main ways in which projects can be deployed:
Centralized Shared Model ·
Distributed Private Models ·
Version control is employed in the same way for both scenarios; however, when
using Private Model deployment you have the additional facility of propagating
model updates throughout the team.
Version Control can also be used to share standard Packages between different
projects.
Team Deployment Consider the process of setting up a Version Control environment and applying
Version Control to a project to be accessed by a number of users.
Version Control Basics Enterprise Architect enforces serialized editing of Version Controlled Packages,
using the lock-modify-unlock mode of operation.
Applying Version Control
to ModelsUsing Version Control consists of placing individual model Packages under
Version Control, rather than Version Controlling the project as a whole.
Version Control and
Project Reference DataTo share changes in reference data between users in a version-controlled project
deployed as multiple private models, you periodically export the reference data
from the model where the changes were made, and import it into the other models
maintained by the team.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 354 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Offline Version Control You can prevent the system from attempting to make any Version Control
connections by choosing to Work Offline before loading a model.
If Enterprise Architect is unable to connect a Version Control Configuration for any
reason, it displays warning messages to notify you and provides 'offline' Version
Control functionality for all Packages associated with the failed connection.
Notes
Packages under Version Control are identified in the Project Browser by icons that indicate the current status of the ·
Package
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 355 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control Usage
The Version Control facility can be used in many different ways, although these roughly fall into one of four types of use
as discussed here.
Usage
Type Details
Single Shared model Users share a model stored in a central project file or DBMS repository. In this
configuration you can view changes to other users' Packages without explicitly
having to check them out, by simply refreshing your view of the model.
Version control is used to:
Archive successive versions of your work to date ·
Maintain Package revision history ·
Recover from unwanted changes or accidental deletions, through an 'undo' ·
facility
Regulate access to Packages ·
Multiple Private models One model is created by a single user who configures it for Version Control. The
model file is then distributed to other users, with each user storing their own private
copy of the model.
Version Control is used to:
Propagate changes to the model, throughout the team ·
Archive successive versions of your work to date ·
Maintain Package revision history ·
Recover from unwanted changes or accidental deletions, through an 'undo' ·
facility
Regulate access to Packages ·
Shared Packages Individual users create separate models but share one or more Packages:
Users share Packages through Version Control ·
Standard Packages A company might have a standard set of read-only Packages that are broadly
shared:
Individual users retrieve Packages with the Get Package menu option ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 356 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control of Model Data
When applying Version Control in Enterprise Architect, you place individual model Packages under Version Control,
and not the project as a whole.
All Enterprise Architect models are stored in databases - even the .eap file is an MS Jet database. In simple terms, the
project file is a single entity of binary data. Being binary data, the project file would require the use of the
lock-modify-unlock model of Version Control, which would mean that only a single user at a time could work on any
given (Version Controlled) model. Therefore, it is not practical to apply Version Control to the database (.eap file) as a
whole; this can also create problems for you in that:
Most Version Control systems mark their controlled files as read only, unless they are specifically checked-out to ·
you
The .eap file is an MS Jet database, and Enterprise Architect must be able to open this file for read/write access ·
when you load your model; if the model is read-only, the system displays an error message and fails to load the
model
Version Controlling Packages in your Model
To overcome these limitations, Enterprise Architect exports discrete units of the model - the Packages - as XMI Package
files, and it is these XMI files, not the project file, that are placed under Version Control. The XMI file format used by
Enterprise Architect dictates that they too be treated as binary files - therefore it is not possible to merge the XMI files
either; however, by splitting the model into much smaller parts, many users can work on separate parts of the model
simultaneously.
Version Controlled Nested Packages
Version Controlled nested Packages result in much smaller XMI files being exported, as the parent Packages' XMI files
do not contain any content for the Version Controlled child Packages.
Version Control of nested Packages, together with a model structure of small individual Packages, provides greater scope
for multiple users to work concurrently, as individual users are locking much smaller parts of the model.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 357 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control and Reference Data
Reference data is data that is used across a model or project; it is not Package-specific. Version Control operates at
Package level, and therefore does not capture changes in reference data. Where Version Control is used in a multiple
private model set up, changes in reference data are not brought into the model when Packages are updated from Version
Control.
In a Shared Model environment, all users are accessing the same project reference data. Changes in reference data can be
shared between users in a Version Controlled project deployed as multiple private models, by periodically exporting the
reference data from the model where the changes were made, and importing it into the other models maintained by the
team.
Reference data is exported and imported as an XMI file, which contains whatever types of reference data you want to
transfer. You can place your project reference data under Version Control by exporting the data as an XMI file and apply
Version Control to that file using your Version Control software external to Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 358 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Controlling Packages
Enterprise Architect implements Version Control of your model by exporting Package data from the project database to
XMI Package files, which are placed under Version Control in the source-code control application. The XMI file format
cannot be merged in the same way as ordinary text files can be merged, which is why Enterprise Architect must enforce
serialized editing of Version Controlled Packages, as discussed here.
The Lock-Modify-Unlock Solution
Many Version Control systems use a lock-modify-unlock model to address the problem of different authors in a shared
source overwriting each other's work. In this model, the Version Control repository allows only one person to change a
file at a time, and access is managed using locks.
Harry must lock a file before he can begin making changes to it. If Harry has locked a file, Sally cannot also lock it, and
therefore cannot make any changes to that file. All she can do is read the file, and wait for Harry to finish his changes
and release the lock. After Harry unlocks the file, Sally can take her turn in locking and editing the file.
The Copy-Modify-Merge Solution
Subversion, CVS and a number of other Version Control systems use a copy-modify-merge model as an alternative to
locking. In this model, each user's client contacts the project repository and creates a personal working copy - a local
reflection of the repository's files and directories. Users then work simultaneously and independently, modifying their
private copies. In due course, the private copies are merged together into a new, final version. The Version Control
system often assists with the merging, but ultimately a person is responsible for making it happen correctly.
When Locking is Necessary
While the lock-modify-unlock model is generally considered a hindrance to collaboration, there are still times when
locking is necessary.
The copy-modify-merge model is based on the assumption that files are contextually merge-able: that is, that the files in
the repository are line-based text files (such as program source code). However, for files with binary formats, such as
artwork or sound, it is often impossible to merge conflicting changes. In these situations, it really is necessary for users to
take strict turns in changing the file. Without serialized access, some users end up wasting time on changes that are
ultimately overwritten.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 359 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Applying Version Control in a Team Environment
This is a summary of the process of setting up a Version Control environment and applying Version Control to a project
to be accessed by a number of users.
Version Control - Process Overview
Step Action
1 Install your Version Control product.
2 Create a Version Control repository.
3 Create a Version Control project to be used with your Enterprise Architect project.
4 Check-out a working copy of the Version Control project (a module, project or folder within the Version
Control system) into a local folder.
You must do this for every team member that is accessing the Version Controlled Packages, whether you
are using a single shared model or each team member stores his own private copy of the model.
5 Before attempting to access the new Version Control environment from within Enterprise Architect, you
should first verify that it functions correctly when used outside of Enterprise Architect.
6 Within Enterprise Architect, define a Version Control configuration to provide access to the working copy
files.
The name of the Version Control configuration must be the same across all machines throughout a team.
That is, all Version Control access to a given Package must be through Version Control configurations
with the same name, across all models and all users.
The easiest way to perform this step (throughout the team) is to have one user set up Version Control on
the model and then share that model with the rest of the team.
In Shared Model deployment, all users connect to a single instance of the model database, so the ·
model is shared automatically
In Private Model deployment, it is easiest to distribute copies of the original model (after Version ·
Control has been set up) to all other members of the team
Whenever you open a model (Private or Shared) that uses a Version Control configuration that is not yet
defined on your workstation, a prompt displays to complete the definition for that configuration. This
typically means specifying the local working copy directory and perhaps choosing the Version Control
project associated with this Enterprise Architect project.
Once this has been done, the Version Controlled Packages that already exist in the model are ready for
use.
7 Configure Packages within the Enterprise Architect model for Version Control. That is, apply Version
Control to individual Packages.
8 Check-out and check-in Packages as required.
Notes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 360 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
It is possible to use multiple Version Control Configurations within the same model; different Packages can still use ·
different Version Control Configurations within the model, as long as any given Package is always accessed via the
same Version Control Configuration
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 361 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control Nested Packages
When you save a Package to the Version Control system, only stub information is exported for any nested Packages.
This protects information in a nested Package from being inadvertently over-written by a top level Package.
Operations on Nested Packages
Operation Detail
Checking Out When you check out a Package, you do not modify or delete nested Packages; only
the top level Package is modified.
As a consequence of this behavior, if you check out or get a Version Controlled
Package with nested Packages that are not already in your model, you see stubs in
the model for the nested Packages only.
Get All Latest If you select the 'Get All Latest' option from the Version Control menu, any new
stubs are populated from the Version Control system.
Importing Models You can populate a large and complex model, by 'getting' only the root Packages,
then using 'Get All Latest' to recursively iterate through the attached and nested
Packages.
This is a powerful and efficient means of managing your project and simplifies
handling very large models, even in a distributed environment.
The 'Import a Model Branch' option combines the procedure steps into a single
operation.
Notes
It is recommended that, when sharing a Version Controlled model, you do not mix versions of Enterprise Architect ·
later than version 4.5 with earlier versions; if this is necessary it is best to go to the 'Version Control Settings' dialog
and deselect the 'Save nested version controlled packages to stubs only' checkbox, setting Enterprise Architect to the
pre-version 4.5 behavior (for the current model only)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 362 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Add Connectors To Locked Elements
Generally, when working in a diagram containing locked elements, you cannot add a connector to a locked element.
However, this depends on the lock status of the source and target elements (or more precisely, the lock status of the
parent Packages of the source and target elements, when the source and target element are held in different Packages).
There are scenarios in which a connector can be created on a locked element.
Lock Scenarios
Element Status Add Connectors
Source unlocked, target
unlockedYes, any kind of connector can be added
Source unlocked, target
lockedYes, except for Composition connectors
Source locked, target
unlockedNo, except for Composition connectors
Source locked, target
lockedNo, prohibited for all connectors
Notes
A connector can be added if its source is unlocked - you are modifying what the source can see ·
The exception is Composition connectors, where the target (the parent) must be unlocked - you are modifying the ·
parent by adding children
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 363 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Browser Indicators
Packages under Version Control are identified in the Project Browser by icons that indicate the current status of the
Package.
Indicators
Icon Indicates that
This Package is Version Controlled and not checked out to you.
You cannot edit the Package (until you check out the Package yourself).
This Package is Version Controlled and checked out to you.
You can edit the Package.
This Package is Version Controlled, but you checked it out whilst not connected to
the Version Control server.
You can edit the Package but there could be version conflicts when you check the
Package in again.
This Package is controlled and is represented by an XMI file on disk, but it is not
under Version Control.
You can edit this Package.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 364 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Offline Version Control
When loading a model that uses Version Control, Enterprise Architect normally initializes a connection to the Version
Control system for each Version Control configuration defined in the model. If Enterprise Architect is unable to connect
a Version Control configuration for any reason, it displays warning messages to notify you and provides offline Version
Control functionality for all Packages associated with the failed connection.
You can prevent Enterprise Architect from starting to make any Version Control connections, by selecting to work
offline before loading your model.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Work Offline
Working Offline
Concept Discussion
Choosing to Work Offline Selecting to work offline is useful if you know beforehand that Enterprise Architect
cannot connect to your Version Control system. For example: If you are working on
a laptop computer that is disconnected from your network, on an Enterprise
Architect model that uses a large number of Version Control configurations, you
can select to work offline before you load the model to avoid all the error messages
that the system would normally display as each Version Control connection attempt
failed.
You can switch between working offline and working online at any time, either
before or after a model is loaded, by toggling the 'Work Offline' menu option.
Enterprise Architect disconnects or reconnects Version Control (depending on the
connection availability) according to your selection.
Using Version Control
Whilst Disconnected From
the Version Control ServerEnterprise Architect 'remembers' the status of a model’s Version Controlled
Packages. Packages that were checked out to you prior to disconnecting from the
server are still shown as checked out to you, even though you are no longer
connected to the server. You can still edit these Packages as you normally would.
Packages that were not checked out to you prior to disconnecting from the server
are shown as Version Controlled and locked. You cannot edit these Packages until
you check them out.
Offline Check Out You can 'check-out' and edit a Version Controlled Package even when your
machine is disconnected from the Version Control server. In this example, the
colored 'figure 8' icon for DFD indicates that you have checked it out whilst off
line.
(The gray 'figure 8' icon shown against Logical View indicates that you have
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 365 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
checked out a Version Controlled Package on line.)
You should be aware that the Version Control system, and therefore other users,
have no way of knowing that you have 'checked-out' a Package whilst offline. It is
not possible to merge changes to an XMI file that result from two users editing the
same Package at the same time. If an offline checkout leads to two people editing
the same Package at the same time, when the changes are brought back online the
first-saved set of changes is lost.
Checking In a Package
That Was Checked Out
OfflineOnce you reconnect your system to the Version Control server, if the Package you
checked out offline is not currently checked out by another user, you can check in
that Package. However, before Enterprise Architect checks in the Package, it
compares the local working copy of the Package file with the latest revision in the
repository. (These Package files remain unchanged in your work area until
Enterprise Architect exports the Package again before checking in.) If the
repository version remains unchanged from when you last updated your local copy,
Enterprise Architect exports and checks in your Package without further prompting.
On the other hand, if the repository now contains a file that has changed since you
last updated your local copy, checking in your Package would overwrite those
changes. Enterprise Architect displays a message warning you of the pending data
loss and giving you the opportunity to abort the check in. At this point, you must
decide whether to discard your own changes, using the 'Undo Check Out'
command, or continue with your check in and overwrite the changes that have been
committed to the repository since you last updated your local copy from the
repository.
You can use the 'File Properties' command to determine who checked in the last
changes to this Package. This might help you to discover what changes have been
uploaded and decide whose changes take precedence.
Update Before You
DisconnectWhenever you are connected to the Version Control server, you are always working
with the latest version of a Package. This is because you cannot modify a Package
until you check it out from Version Control, and checking it out loads the latest
revision from the repository into your model.
This cannot happen when you are disconnected from the Version Control server.
You are working on whatever versions you have on your machine, dating back to
the last time you updated your local copy of each Version Controlled Package. So,
if you are planning to work on a model whilst disconnected from Version Control,
it is a very good idea to make sure that you have the latest versions of all Packages
before you disconnect. The 'Get All Latest' option makes this a simple task.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 366 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control Branching
Currently, Enterprise Architect does not support Version Control Branching.
Work-arounds to achieve similar results might be possible for certain version-control products; contact Sparx Support for
advice.
Contacts
User Type Contact via
Registered users https://sparxsystems.com/registered/reg_support.html
Trial users support@sparxsystems.com
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 367 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control Product Setup
To control and maintain the different revisions of your project Packages, Enterprise Architect uses third-party Version
Control products. Once your Version Control product is installed and a suitable environment has been created, Enterprise
Architect can use that environment to control your project's Packages.
Typically, Version Control products consist of:
A server component ·
A client component ·
Enterprise Architect integrates with the Version Control client components for Subversion, CVS and MS Team
Foundation Server command line clients, as well as for products having API clients that comply with the MS SCCI
specification.
Version Control System Components
Component Detail
Version Control Server The server component maintains the controlled files in their many revisions, in a
central repository.
The server component is usually located on a server machine that is accessible to all
team members who are using Version Control.
Server Configuration The steps for configuring a Version Control server are, broadly:
Install the software ·
Create a repository ·
Create Version Control projects (or modules or folders for use with specific ·
projects)
Configure user IDs and passwords ·
For details on configuring any particular Version Control server, consult the
appropriate documentation provided with the Version Control product.
Version Control Client The client component manages the working copies of the controlled files,
submitting files to or retrieving files from the server as required.
A Version Control client must be installed on every machine on which you run
Enterprise Architect and want to access your Version Control system.
Client Configuration The steps for configuring a Version Control client are, broadly:
Install the software ·
Create a new directory for use as a local working copy folder ·
Log in to the Version Control server ·
Associate the working copy folder with its corresponding server repository ·
folder
For details on setting up a product-specific Version Control environment for use
with Enterprise Architect, click on the appropriate link in the next column.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 368 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 369 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
System Requirements
Enterprise Architect is a Windows-based application and requires a Windows-based Version Control client for
integration. It is independent of the Version Control server component and the platform on which that runs.
Version Control Product Requirements
Product Detail
Subversion Subversion is free, open source software.
Subversion server components are available to run on a wide range of different
hardware and operating systems.
Enterprise Architect is not affected by your choice of server components, but
requires Subversion's Windows-based command line client for integration.
There are many graphical user interface clients available for use with Subversion,
such as TortoiseSVN; this type of client cannot be used directly for integration with
Enterprise Architect, but can be very useful in preparing a working Subversion
environment for use by Enterprise Architect.
Binary Packages are available for download from:
http://subversion.apache.org/packages.html ·
Subversion documentation is available from:
http://svnbook.red-bean.com/nightly/en/index.html ·
Concurrent Versions
System (CVS)CVS is free, open source software.
CVS server components are available to run on a wide range of different hardware
and operating systems.
Enterprise Architect is not affected by your choice of server components, but
requires CVS's Windows-based command line client for integration.
There are many graphical user interface clients available for use with CVS, such as
TortoiseCVS; this type of client cannot be used directly for integration with
Enterprise Architect, but can be very useful in preparing a working CVS
environment for use by Enterprise Architect.
The software is available for download from:
http://www.nongnu.org/cvs/ ·
CVS documentation is available from:
http://cvsbook.red-bean.com/cvsbook.html ·
Microsoft Team
Foundation ServerEnterprise Architect is able to use either the:
Command line client for TFS, or ·
MS TFS-SCC client ·
Your choice of client affects how you specify your Version Control Configuration.
MS TFS-SCC clients are available for download from Microsoft's web pages. (Run
an Internet search for 'TFS MSSCCI'.)
Common Source Code
Control (SCC)-compatibleAny Version Control product that provides a client that complies with the Microsoft
Common Source Code Control standard, version 1.1 or higher, can be integrated
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 370 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
products with Enterprise Architect.
These products are SCC-compatible and are known to successfully integrate with
Enterprise Architect:
Accurev ·
ClearCase ·
MS Visual Source Safe ·
MS TFS-SCC ·
MKS Source Integrity ·
Perforce ·
Source Offsite ·
Snapshot CM ·
Products that do not appear in this list should still integrate successfully with
Enterprise Architect, if there is a client available for that product that complies with
the MS SCC API specification.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 371 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Subversion Environment
You can use Subversion as a Version Control provider for Enterprise Architect. The first step in doing this is for a
Subversion administrator to install and configure the appropriate software. A number of basic tasks are performed in
creating an operational Subversion environment, and useful tools are available for performing some of these tasks.
Tasks in Creating a Subversion Environment
Task Detail
Install server components Executable files for Subversion can be obtained from the Apache Software
Foundation.
Subversion server components are available to run on a wide range of different
hardware and operating systems; Enterprise Architect is not affected by your choice
of server components.
VisualSVN is a package that can greatly simplify the installation, configuration and
management of your Subversion server.
Create a repository Please consult the official Subversion documentation.
Create Subversion users Please consult the official Subversion documentation.
Create a new repository
sub-treeIt is good practice to create a new repository sub-tree in Subversion for each new
Enterprise Architect model being added to Version Control with Subversion. Users
should create a new local working copy from the sub-tree to be used with that
model.
TortoiseSVN can greatly simplify the process of creating new repository sub-trees.
Install client components Executable files for Subversion can be obtained from the Apache Software
Foundation.
Create a working copy
folderA working copy folder must exist on each users' machine, for Enterprise Architect
to use when exporting and importing the Version Controlled Package files. It is this
folder that is specified as the Local Project Path, when defining your Version
Control Configurations.
The working copy folder is the 'sandbox' where you modify the controlled files. The
working copy folder is usually associated with a folder that exists within the
Version Control repository. In Subversion, to create a local working copy you
perform an initial check-out of a folder from the Subversion repository; this
downloads a copy of the folder and its contents, to create your local working copy.
TortoiseSVN can greatly simplify the initial check out of a working copy folder.
Setting up Subversion
under Wine/CrossOverThe process of setting up and using Subversion with Enterprise Architect under
Wine is almost identical to the process when running natively under Windows,
apart from minor differences in installing the Subversion client and performing the
initial check out of the working copy folder.
Notes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 372 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Enterprise Architect relies on exclusive file locking when applying Version Control to its Packages; file locking was ·
not introduced into Subversion until version 1.2, therefore Enterprise Architect does not work with Subversion
releases earlier than Subversion 1.2
Enterprise Architect can only communicate with the Subversion server using the Subversion command line client ·
svn.exe
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 373 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a new Repository Sub-tree
When you set up Subversion as your Version Control tool, it is good practice to create a new repository sub-tree in
Subversion for each new Enterprise Architect model. The sub-tree can be used to control the Package files for your
model.
Create a new sub-tree in the Subversion Repository
Step Action
1 Use Windows Explorer to create a temporary directory on your PC file system, to be imported into the
Subversion repository as a new repository sub-tree. The directory would have this structure:
2 Open a Windows command prompt, navigate to tempDir and issue the Subversion command import.
For example:
    C:\Documents and Settings\user> cd \tempDir
    C:\tempDir> svn import . https://host.example.com:8443/repos/
    --message "Repository Initialization"
3 On your PC, delete the temporary directory structure (tempDir) and all its contents.
Notes
After the import is finished, the original tree is not converted into a Subversion working copy; you should delete the ·
temporary structure and check out a fresh working copy of the tree
The process can also be performed using TortoiseSVN's Repository Browser, which provides commands for simply ·
creating new folders directly in the repository
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 374 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a Local Working Copy
In order to use Subversion to provide Version Control of the Packages in a model, you need to prepare a functional SVN
working copy folder that can be accessed through an Enterprise Architect Version Control configuration within that
model.
Create a Subversion working copy folder
Step Action
1 Choose or create a suitable directory on your system in which to create your Subversion working copy.
2 Open a command prompt window and navigate to the directory you have selected. For example:
    C:\> mkdir mySVNWorkSpace
    C:\> mkdir mySVNWorkSpace/myEAModelName
    C:\> cd mySVNWorkSpace/myEAModelName
3 Perform the initial check out from the Subversion repository, specifying the repository folder and local
working copy folder, as well as your user name and password. For example:
    C:\> svn checkout "https://myserver:8443/svn/repos_folder
    "C:\mySVNWorkSpace/myEAModelName"
    --username myUserName
    --password myPassword
(By specifying your Subversion username and password, you ensure that they are correctly cached by
Subversion and available for use by Enterprise Architect.)
If you specify the HTTPS protocol when performing the initial Subversion check out, a prompt displays to
accept a security certificate; in this instance, press the P key to permanently accept the certificate.
The nominated local folder is configured as a Subversion working copy folder.
Any files already existing in the repository folder are downloaded to the working copy folder as working
copy files.
4 Verify that your Subversion environment functions correctly.
Notes
It is important that Subversion caches your username and password, so that it never has to prompt for user input; a ·
check-out operation might not request authentication, and if it does not you should perform an action that does
request authentication, such as adding and committing a dummy test file
The process can also be performed using TortoiseSVN's Checkout command (which provides options to browse ·
when specifying both your repository folder and your local folder); when prompted for authentication details by
TortoiseSVN, make sure you place a check against the 'Save Authentication Data' option
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 375 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Verify the SVN Workspace
After creating the Subversion local working copy to hold the working copies of your Package files, you can verify that it
functions correctly before attempting to use it with Enterprise Architect. You need to be able to add files to Subversion,
lock the files and commit changes to those files.
Verify correct operation of a Subversion working copy folder
Step Action
1 Use Windows to open a command prompt window.
2 Select the directory you specified as the working copy, in the Subversion checkout command when
preparing the SVN workspace. For example:
    C:\> cd mySVNWorkSpace
3 Create a test file, such as Test.txt, containing the text Subversion Test. For example:
    C:\> echo Subversion Test > Test.txt
4 Execute each of these Subversion commands:
svn add Test.txt ·
svn commit -m"Commit comment" Test.txt ·
svn update Test.txt ·
svn lock Test.txt ·
Use your preferred editor to modify the file and save the changes ·
svn commit -m"Second commit comment" Test.txt ·
The commands should execute without any errors and without prompting the user for any extra input.
Notes
Your environment must be set up such that you can perform these operations without ever being prompted for user ·
ID or password; for further information, please see the Caching Client Credentials topic in the official Subversion
documentation
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 376 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Subversion Under Wine-Crossover
If you want to set up and use Subversion with Enterprise Architect under Wine, the process is almost identical to the
process for setting up and using the systems under Windows. When running Enterprise Architect under Wine or
CrossOver, you still use a Windows-based Subversion command line client.
There are some minor differences in the way you prepare the Subversion working environment, specifically in the way
you install your Subversion client and the way you check out a working copy folder from the Subversion repository.
System Requirements
Sparx Systems has tested the use of Enterprise Architect with Subversion under Wine 1.2, on macOS 10.4 and 10.6.2,
and on Ubuntu 10.04. All tests were passed.
When using Wine 1.2 on the Ubuntu 9.10 platform, Sparx Systems was able to use the svn: and file: protocols to
communicate with the SVN server; but not the https: protocol.
Installing a Subversion Client
Wine is able to install applications from either a Windows .exe file, or a .msi installer file.
Place the installer for your Windows Subversion client in a convenient location on the native file system, then open a
Wine console window from within Enterprise Architect and run the installer from within the Wine console. Your
Subversion installation can then access the same C: drive and folders that Enterprise Architect is accessing.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 377 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Preparing a Subversion Environment Under Wine
Under Wine, you can install Subversion from either a Windows .exe file, or a .msi file. By performing your Subversion
installation and initial check out from a Wine console window opened from within Enterprise Architect, you have access
to the same C: drive and folders that Enterprise Architect is accessing.
Set up Subversion for use with Enterprise Architect, running under Wine
Step Action
1 Start Enterprise Architect.
You do not have to load a project at this point.
2From the 'Start' ribbon, select 'View > Visual Style > Customize > Tools: 
 '
A new, blank entry is opened on the 'Tools' tab of the 'Customize' dialog.
3 Define the new menu item entry:
In the newly-opened 'Menu contents' field, type the name 'Wine Console' ·
In the 'Command' field, type 'wineconsole' ·
In the 'Arguments' field, type 'cmd' ·
Leave the 'Initial directory' field blank ·
4 Click on the Close button.
The 'Customize' dialog closes.
5 Select the ribbon option: 'Configure > User Tools > Wine Console'.
A Wine console window opens.
6 Type 'C:' and press the Enter key.
The Wine console switches to the C: drive.
7 Issue the command to install your Subversion client. For example:
    C:\>/Installers/Subversion-client-1.9.5.win32.exe
To install from a .msi file, use Wine's msiexec utility. For example:
    C:\>msiexec /i "Installers\Slik-Subversion-1.9.7-win32.msi"
Installation of the Subversion command line client begins.
8 Create a folder to serve as the working copy folder to be used by Enterprise Architect. For example:
    C:\>mkdir C:\VC_workspaces\SVN_workcopy
9 Issue the command to perform the initial checkout from the Subversion repository, specifying the
repository folder, working copy folder, username and password. For example:
    C:\>svn checkout "https://myServer:8443/svn/repos_folder"
           "C:\VC_workspaces\SVN_workcopy "
           --username myUserName
           --password myPassword
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 378 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(After specifying your Subversion username and password, they are correctly cached by Subversion and
are available for use by Enterprise Architect.)
If the HTTPS protocol is specified when performing the initial Subversion check out, you are prompted to
accept a security certificate; in this instance, press the P key to permanently accept the certificate.
The nominated local folder is configured as a Subversion working copy folder. Any files already existing
in the repository folder are downloaded to the working copy folder as working copy files.
10 Type 'Exit' and press the Enter key.
The Wine console window closes.
You are now ready to load a project in Enterprise Architect and apply Version Control to it, using the
normal Windows-based procedures.
Notes
You should copy the installer for your Windows Subversion client to a convenient location on the native file system, ·
so that you can easily refer to it from within the Wine console window in step 7
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 379 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
TortoiseSVN
TortoiseSVN is a Windows shell extension for Subversion; it provides icon overlays in Windows Explorer that are useful
as a tool for observing the status of your Subversion controlled files. You can also use it to create your repository
sub-trees and check out local working copies from within Windows Explorer, using simple menu commands.
You can download TortoiseSVN from http://tortoisesvn.net/downloads.html.
Notes
Enterprise Architect can only communicate with the Subversion server using the Subversion command line client ·
svn.exe
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 380 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a TFS Environment
You can use Microsoft Team Foundation Server (TFS) as a Version Control provider for Enterprise Architect. The first
step in doing this is for a TFS administrator to install and configure the TFS server and client applications. A number of
basic tasks are performed in creating an operational TFS environment.
Tasks in Creating a TFS Environment
Task Detail
Obtain and install TFS Enterprise Architect uses the TFS command line client to integrate TFS Version
Control.
The TFS command line client is normally available as part of your Visual Studio
installation.
Choose a TFS project It is good practice to create a new TFS project, or least a new Source Control
Folder within a project, for each Enterprise Architect project being added to
Version Control with TFS.
If you have a single Enterprise Architect project that contains many different
models (for example, a DBMS hosted project with multiple model root nodes), you
might choose to create a new TFS project for each separate model.
For further information, please consult your TFS product documentation.
Create a TFS workspace A working copy folder must exist on each users' machine, for Enterprise Architect
to use when exporting and importing the Version Controlled Package files. It is this
folder that is specified as the Local Project Path, when defining your Version
Control Configurations.
The working copy folder is the 'sandbox' where you modify the controlled files. The
working copy folder is usually associated with a folder that exists within the
Version Control repository. In TFS, the TFS workspace is used to map a local
working folder on your PC to a Source Control Folder within a TFS project.
TFS 2012 and VS 2012 (and later versions) feature a new type of workspace called
'local' workspaces. Do not attempt to use TFS 'local' workspaces with Enterprise
Architect. You must use only 'server' workspaces for Enterprise Architect Version
Control, as 'local' workspaces do not support the application of checkout locks to
files. Enterprise Architect relies on the presence of checkout locks to ensure that
Packages can only be checked out exclusively and that a given Package is not
already checked-out in some other project (for instance, in a Private Model
deployment). This is necessary because it is not practical to merge the XMI
Package files that Enterprise Architect uses for Version Control.
A single TFS workspace can map many different local folders, each one to a
separate Source Control Folder. In this case, TFS can take a long time to work
through and update the files in all of those folders, and the system might appear to
'freeze' whilst it waits for TFS to hand back program control.
You can avoid this if you keep your Version Controlled Package files in a folder
that is separate from other artifacts, such as source code files, creating a separate
work space to use just for your Package files, or creating and mapping a separate
folder for Package files within an existing workspace.
Configure exclusive
check-outsThe XMI format files used for the Version Control of Enterprise Architect's
Packages can not be merged as if they were ordinary text files. Therefore,
Enterprise Architect must enforce serialized editing of its Version Controlled
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 381 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Packages. As a consequence, it is important that TFS is configured to use 'exclusive
checkouts' for XML files.
Verify the TFS Workspace Enterprise Architect uses the TFS command line client to checkin and checkout
files from the TFS repository. After creating the TFS workspace, it is important to
verify that the command line client can be used to add, check-in and check-out files
residing in the working copy folder that is mapped through this workspace.
Notes
TFS can also be used with an SCC client; the MS TFS-SCC client is available for download from Microsoft's web ·
site
MDG Integration for Visual Studio 2005 or 2008 enhances TFS support by providing access to, for example, work ·
items and bugs within both Enterprise Architect and the MDG Integration product
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 382 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
TFS Workspaces
In order to use TFS to provide Version Control of the Packages in a model, you prepare a functional TFS workspace that
can be accessed through an Enterprise Architect Version Control configuration within that model. You use the TFS
workspace to map a local working folder on your PC to a Source Control Folder within a TFS project repository.
It is assumed that have TFS 2013 open and a TFS Team Project already exists for you to use in Version Control of the
Packages of your Enterprise Architect project. You can create the TFS workspace through MS Visual Studio.
TFS 2013 and later versions support the use of Local workspaces. However, Local workspaces do not support the
application of checkout locks. For this reason, Sparx Systems strongly advises against the use of Local workspaces when
Version Controlling your Enterprise Architect Package files. Using Local workspaces carries a high risk of merge
conflicts when checking in, which would almost certainly result in loss of data or a corrupted model database.
Map a local folder to a TFS Source Control Folder
Step Action
1 Connect to your TFS server.
From the TFS main menu, choose 'View | Team Explorer'.
In the Team Explorer toolbar, click on the Connect to Team Projects button (fourth from left, with a
power plug icon).
The 'Team Explorer Connect' page displays.
2 Click on the link 'Select Team Projects...'
The 'Connect to Team Foundation Server' dialog displays.
3 Click on the appropriate Team Foundation Server, Team Project Collection and Team Project, then click
on the Connect button.
4 Click on the Home page of the Team Explorer, and then on the Source Control Explorer button.
The Source Control Explorer view displays.
5 In the Source Control Explorer, click on the drop-down arrow in the 'Workspace' field in the toolbar, then
click on 'Workspaces' at the bottom of the list.
The 'Manage Workspaces' dialog displays.
6 Click on the Add button.
The 'Add Workspace' dialog displays.
7 Click on the Advanced button.
A number of new fields display on the dialog.
8 Type in an appropriate name for the new workspace and, if required, type in a comment.
9 Set the 'Location' field to 'Server'. This setting is important.
This setting is not available in TFS 2010 and earlier releases, where all workspaces are Server based.
10 Click in the Source Control Folder column, then click on the Browse button to select a Source Control
Folder.
Select the Source Control folder (in the Team Project) to use for controlling Enterprise Architect
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 383 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Packages.
11 Click on the Browse button in the 'Local Folder' column and create a new local folder.
This is the working copy folder into which Enterprise Architect exports the Package files.
12 Click on the OK button.
The new workspace is created and saved.
The 'Add Workspace' dialog closes.
13 Click on the OK button.
The 'Manage Workspaces' dialog closes.
Notes
The local folder referenced in step 11 is the Working Copy Path that should be specified when defining an ·
Enterprise Architect Version Control Configuration to use this TFS workspace
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 384 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
TFS Exclusive Check Outs
The XMI format files used for the Version Control of Enterprise Architect's Packages can not be merged as ordinary text
files can. Therefore Enterprise Architect must enforce serialized editing of its Version Controlled Packages, and it is
important that Team Foundation Server is configured to use 'exclusive checkouts' for XML files. Otherwise, TFS can
return file statuses that make it look as if the Package file is not checked-out by another user when indeed it is.
You set exclusive checkouts in the TFS workspace through MS Visual Studio.
Configure TFS to enforce exclusive check outs for XML files
Step Action
1 Using Visual Studio, from the main menu select 'View | Team Explorer'.
2 In the 'Team Explorer' pane, right-click on the TFS Server name that is controlling the Enterprise
Architect Package files, then from the context menu select 'Team Foundation Server Settings | Source
Control File Types'.
3 Select the entry for XML files (or create an entry if necessary) then click on the Edit button.
4 Deselect the 'Enable file merging and multiple check out' checkbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 385 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Verify the TFS Workspace
Enterprise Architect will be using the TFS command line client to commit file updates from the local working copy
folder into the TFS repository. After creating the TFS workspace that maps your local working copy folder to a TFS
repository folder, it is good practice to verify that the TFS workspace functions correctly before attempting to use it with
Enterprise Architect. You need to be able to add files to TFS, place a check-out lock on the files and check-in changes to
those files.
Verify correct operation of a TFS Workspace
Step Action
1 Use Windows to open a command prompt window.
2 Select the directory you specified as the local working copy folder when creating the TFS workspace.
For example:
    C:\> cd myTFSWorkingCopyFolder
3 Create a test file, such as Test.xml, containing the text 'my TFS Test'. For example:
    C:\> echo my TFS Test > Test.xml
(The filename extension '.xml' is used because the TFS server should have been configured to allow
exclusive checkouts for XML files.)
4 Using the command line client, execute each of these TFS commands:
tf.exe add Test.xml ·
tf.exe checkin Test.xml /override:"Manual check in." /comment:"a message" ·
tf.exe checkout /lock:checkout Test.xml ·
Use your preferred editor to modify the file and save the changes.
tf.exe checkin Test.xml /override:"Manual check in." /comment:"a message" ·
tf.exe get . /recursive ·
Notes
All of the commands in step 4 should execute without any errors; in particular, you should be able to apply a ·
checkout lock when checking out the file
If the checkout command reports any errors, you might have to reconfigure the TFS workspace as a server based ·
workspace, or you might have to configure the TFS Server to use 'exclusive checkouts' for XML files
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 386 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create a CVS Environment
You can use Concurrent Versions System (CVS) as a Version Control provider for Enterprise Architect. The first step in
doing this is for a CVS administrator to install and configure the appropriate software. A number of basic tasks are
performed in creating an operational CVS environment, and useful tools are available for performing some of these
tasks.
Tasks in Creating a CVS Environment
Task Detail
Install server components Executable files for CVS can be obtained from March Hare Software.
CVS server components are available to run on a wide range of different hardware
and operating systems; Enterprise Architect is not affected by your choice of server
components.
Create a repository Please consult the official CVS documentation.
Create CVS users Please consult the official CVS documentation.
Create a new repository
moduleIt is recommended good practice to create a new repository module in CVS for each
new Enterprise Architect model being added to Version Control with CVS. Users
should create a new local working copy folder from the module to be used with that
model.
A repository module represents a project, or a set of related files in the repository.
TortoiseCVS can greatly simplify the process of creating new repository sub-trees.
Install client components Executable files for CVS can be obtained from March Hare Software.
Enterprise Architect is a Windows based application - it requires a Windows based
CVS command line client for integration.
Create a working copy
folderA working copy folder must exist on each users' machine, for Enterprise Architect
to use when exporting and importing the Version Controlled Package files. It is this
folder that is specified as the Local Project Path, when defining your Version
Control Configurations.
The working copy folder is the 'sandbox' where you modify the controlled files. The
working copy folder is usually associated with a folder that exists within the
Version Control repository. In CVS, to create a local working copy you perform an
initial check-out of a folder from the CVS repository; this downloads a copy of the
folder and its contents, to create your local working copy.
TortoiseCVS can greatly simplify the initial check out of a working copy folder.
Setting up CVS under
Wine/CrossOverThe process of setting up and using CVS with Enterprise Architect under Wine is
almost identical to the process when running natively under Windows, apart from
minor differences in installing the CVS client and performing the initial checkout of
the working copy folder.
Notes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 387 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If you do not already use CVS for Version Control, you should consider using Subversion instead; Subversion's ·
client-server protocols provide a broader range of possibilities for connecting to remote servers, with easier set up of
secure connections
TortoiseCVS is a Windows shell extension; Enterprise Architect cannot use TortoiseCVS as its client, it must use ·
the CVS command line client
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 388 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Prepare a CVS Local Workspace
In order to use CVS to provide Version Control of the Packages in a model, you need to prepare a functional CVS
working copy folder that can be accessed through an Enterprise Architect Version Control configuration within that
model.
Prepare a CVS Working Copy Folder
Step Action
1 Ask your System Administrator to install CVS and create a remote repository, with a module that you can
use to control your Enterprise Architect Package files.
Your administrator must create a username and password for you before you can make a connection.
2 Select or create a suitable directory to use as your CVS working copy directory.
3 Open a command prompt window and navigate to your CVS working copy directory. For example:
    C:\> mkdir myCVSWorkSpace
    C:\> cd myCVSWorkSpace
4 Log in to the remote CVS repository. For example:
    C:\myCVSWorkSpace> cvs -d:pserver:myUserID@ServerName:/reposPath login
Replace myUserID with your CVS username, replace ServerName with the name of your CVS server and
replace reposPath with the path to the repository on the server.
A prompt for a password displays.
5 Enter your password.
You are logged in to the CVS server.
6 Perform the initial checkout of the CVS repository module, into the local working copy directory. For
example:
    C:\myCVSWorkSpace> cvs -d:pserver:myUserID@ServerName:/reposPath checkout moduleName
(Replace moduleName with the name of the repository module that you want to check out.)
A subdirectory is created in your current working directory, with the same name as the module being
checked out.
Any files already existing in the repository module are downloaded to the working copy folder as working
copy files.
7 Verify that your CVS environment functions correctly.
Notes
Much of the process can also be performed (more simply) using the TortoiseCVS command 'Make New Module' ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 389 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Verify the CVS Workspace
After creating the CVS local working copy to hold the working copies of your Package files, you can verify that it
functions correctly before attempting to use it with Enterprise Architect. You need to be able to add files to CVS, and
commit changes to those files. You also need to be able to register as an editor of the file and retrieve the list of currently
registered editors.
Verify correct operation of a CVS working copy folder
Step Action
1 Use Windows to open a command prompt window.
2 Select the directory you specified as the working copy in the cvs checkout command, when preparing the
CVS workspace. For example:
    C:\> cd myCVSWorkSpace
3 Create a test file, such as Test.txt, containing the text CVS Test. For example:
    C:\> echo CVS Test > Test.txt
4 Execute these CVS commands:
cvs add Test.txt ·
cvs commit -m"Commit comment" Test.txt ·
cvs update Test.txt ·
cvs edit Test.txt ·
cvs editors Test.txt ·
The commands should execute without any errors and without prompting the user for any extra input.
The editors command should produce output that resembles this:
    Test1.txt myUserID Tue Aug 9 10:08:43 2009 GMT myComputer
    C:\myCVSWorkSpace\moduleName
5 Take note of the userID that follows the filename.
Enterprise Architect must find and use this user ID when you create your Version Control configuration.
Notes
Your environment must be set up such that you can perform these operations without ever being prompted for input, ·
such as user ID or password
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 390 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
TortoiseCVS
TortoiseCVS is a Windows shell extension for CVS; it provides icon overlays in Windows Explorer that are useful as a
tool for observing the status of your CVS controlled files. You can also use it to create your repository modules and
check out local working copies from within Windows Explorer using simple menu commands.
You can download TortoiseCVS from: http://www.tortoisecvs.org.
Notes
Enterprise Architect must use the CVS command line client to communicate with the CVS server; it cannot use ·
TortoiseCVS
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 391 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create an SCC Environment
You can use a Microsoft Common Source Code Control (SCC) compatible product as a Version Control provider for
Enterprise Architect. The first step in doing this is for an administrator to install and configure the server and client
applications. A number of basic tasks are performed in creating an operational SCC-based environment.
Tasks in Creating an SCC Environment
Task Detail
Install and configure your
chosen Version Control
productA Version Control server component is typically installed on a dedicated server
machine. All Enterprise Architect users who require access to Version Control must
be able to connect to the server machine.
After installing the Version Control software, the administrator should also create
Version Control user IDs for all users who require access to Version Control.
For further information, consult the product documentation for your particular
Version Control product.
Create a new SCC project It is good practice to create a new SCC Version Control project, or least a new
folder within a project, for each Enterprise Architect project being added to Version
Control with SCC.
If you have a single Enterprise Architect project that contains many different
models (for example, a DBMS hosted project with multiple model root nodes), you
might choose to create a new SCC Version Control project for each separate model.
For further information, consult the product documentation for your particular
Version Control product.
Configure your SCC
project to support exclusive
check-outs for .XML filesThe XMI-format files used for the Version Control of Enterprise Architect
Packages can not be merged in the same way as ordinary text files can. Therefore,
Enterprise Architect must enforce serialized editing of its Version Controlled
Packages. As a consequence, it is important that your Version Control application is
configured to use 'exclusive checkouts' for XML files.
Create a local working
copy folderA working copy folder must exist on each users' machine, for Enterprise Architect
to use when exporting and importing the Version Controlled Package files. It is this
folder that is specified as the Local Project Path, when defining your Version
Control Configurations.
The working copy folder is the 'sandbox' where you modify the controlled files. The
working copy folder is usually associated with a folder that exists within the
Version Control repository. Your Version Control product provides some means by
which you associate a working copy folder with a repository folder.
For further information, consult the documentation for your particular Version
Control product.
Notes
When installing the client component software on users' PCs, check that the SCC client is also installed, as it might ·
not be a part of the default installation
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 392 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 393 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Upgrade at Enterprise Architect Version 4.5, Under SCC
Version Control
If you are working in Enterprise Architect release 4.5 or later and you open an SCC Version Controlled project that was
created under a release earlier than 4.5, you must identify the SCC connection with a new unique ID. You can assign a
name to the existing SCC configuration or associate the project with another configuration that has previously been
assigned a unique ID.
By having a unique ID for each Version Control configuration, you can assign a configuration quickly and efficiently
using configurations that have been created previously for other Version Controlled repositories. This enables you to
configure the many Packages to use an existing Version Control repository; this can apply to Packages created for more
than just one model enabling a great deal of flexibility.
Upgrade an existing SCC Version Controlled project created before release 4.5, in
Enterprise Architect release 4.5 or later
Step Action
1 Open the project that has an SCC Version Control configuration created in Enterprise Architect earlier
than version 4.5.
The 'Select or Create Unique ID for Version Control' dialog automatically displays.
2 On the dialog, either create an ID for an existing configuration or choose a previously created one from
the 'Unique ID' drop-down list.
3 The existing SCC configuration is the initial value, represented by SCC-XXXXX; this number is not
especially meaningful, therefore it is recommended that the configuration be given a meaningful name.
4 You can associate the Version Controlled Package with a previously-defined configuration by selecting an
existing configuration from the 'Unique ID' drop-down list (if one exists).
5 After you have assigned the unique ID, click on the OK button to load the model.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 394 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control Set Up
Once you or an Administrator have installed and configured the Version Control product software, to start using Version
Control you must first define a Version Control configuration within your project in Enterprise Architect, to be used to
control the Packages in the project. You can define any number of Version Control configurations in a single model, but
any given Package is associated with only one configuration.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Version Control Settings
Define Version Control Configuration
Step Action
1 On the 'Version Control Settings' dialog, click on the New button.
2 In the 'Unique ID' field, type a suitable configuration name.
3 Select the Type of Version Control product you are connecting to, by clicking on the corresponding radio
button.
4 At this point, the middle section of the dialog changes to display a collection of fields specific to the type
of Version Control configuration you are defining.
Enter details relating to the Version Control workspace that this configuration is to use.
5 Click on the Save button. The new configuration is added to the Defined Configurations list.
6 If you want to create another Version Control configuration, return to step 1.
When you have finished defining your Version Control configurations, click on the Close button.
Notes
Version Control Configuration details are stored in the user's Windows Registry settings, but each project stores a ·
list of the configurations it uses, so that Version Control connections can be initialized as the project is being loaded
If you are using the Corporate or extended editions of Enterprise Architect with security enabled, the administrator ·
must also set up access permissions to configure and use Version Control
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 395 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Re-use an Existing Configuration
Once a Version Control configuration has been defined for use in one project, it is possible to re-use that configuration in
other projects to provide access to:
An already existing Version Control environment (a working copy directory and its associated repository that is ·
already in use)
Version Controlled Packages that were created (and Version Controlled) in another project ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration
Context Menu Project Browser | right-click on Package | Package Control | Version Control
Settings
Select existing configuration
Step Action
1 On the 'Version Control Settings' dialog, click on the New button.
The various fields on the dialog are cleared, ready for data entry.
2 In the 'Unique ID' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select one of the previously-defined Version
Control configurations.
The details of the selected configuration are displayed in the dialog.
3 Click on the Save button.
The configuration details are saved and are ready for use in the current project.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 396 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Version Control Settings
Defining Version Control settings within Enterprise Architect should only be performed after you have successfully
created the Version Control environment that you intend to use to control your Package files. If you have not yet done so,
please refer to the Help topic Applying Version Control in a Team Environment for a summary of what is required.
To set up a Version Control configuration on your model, or update an existing Version Control configuration, you
define a number of settings that control how the status of your model is communicated to your Version Control system.
You define these settings using the 'Version Control Settings' dialog.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Version Control Settings
Configuration Options
Option Action
This model is private Select to specify that this model database is to be accessed by just a single user
(Private Model).
Leave unselected (the default) or deselect to specify that the database is to be
accessed by multiple concurrent users (Shared Model).
If in doubt, use the default setting.
Save nested Version
Controlled Packages to
stubs onlySelect to specify that the exported XMI file for a Version Controlled Package will
contain Package stubs (place holders) for nested Version Controlled child Packages
(recommended).
Deselect to specify that the exported XMI file will contain the full content of nested
Version Controlled child Packages.
For all packages, create
placeholders for external
referencesSelect to force all XMI 1.1 imports across the model to exclude incoming
relationships and instead create external references.
If the 'Create placeholders for missing External References during XMI 1.1/2.1
Import' checkbox is not selected in the XML Specifications options for a user, this
field overrides that setting.
Unique ID Specify a name that uniquely identifies the configuration. Either:
Type a name to identify a new configuration, or ·
Click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of a configuration ·
previously defined in a different project (if any exist)
Type Click on the appropriate radio button for the type of Version Control system you
are associating with this configuration.
The middle section of the dialog changes to display a collection of fields relating to
the type of Version Control configuration you are defining.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 397 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Set the type to SCC for:
MS Visual Source Safe ·
Rational Clear Case ·
Perforce ·
AccuRev ·
Any other SCC-compatible clients ·
For any other product that you are using, select the type that matches the product -
CVS, Subversion or TFS.
New Click on this button to clear the fields and create a new Version Control
configuration.
Save Click on this button to save the details of a new or updated configuration.
Delete Click on an entry in the Defined Configurations list and click this button to remove
the definition of the selected configuration from this model.
Defined Configurations Review a list of configurations that are in use in the current model.
In future, do not prompt for
incomplete configurationsSelect to specify that the user is not prompted to complete the definition of
configurations that are not fully specified (the default).
Deselect to prompt the user to complete configurations that are not fully defined.
Close Close the 'Version Control Settings' dialog.
Help Display this Help topic.
Notes
It is important that, for any given Version Controlled Package file, any user accessing that file from any model uses ·
Version Control configurations having the same Unique ID
When you first open a model that was created by another user and that uses Version Control, the Version Control ·
configuration(s) used by that model do not yet exist in your Windows registry settings; you have to complete the
definitions of those configurations before you can use Version Control in that project
If User Security is enabled, you must have 'Configure Version Control' permission to set up Version Control options ·
for the current model
It is possible to use multiple Version Control configurations in the same model ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 398 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
SCC Settings
When you are setting up your Version Control configurations on the 'Version Control Settings' dialog, and you set the
configuration type to 'SCC', the dialog presents a set of fields specific to SCC-based configurations. You can then define
details such as:
The working copy folder to be used with the configuration ·
The details necessary to connect to the SCC Version Control system ·
You set the Version Control configuration type to SCC for version Control providers such as:
MS Visual Source Safe ·
Rational Clear Case ·
Perforce ·
AccuRev ·
Any other SCC-compatible clients ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration: Type: SCC
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Version Control Settings: Type: SCC
Settings
Option Action
Local Project Path Displays the full path of the folder that contains the local (working) copies of the
XMI Package files.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the Select Path
button.
Select Path Click on this button to choose the Local Project Path, by opening a file browser
dialog and navigating through the file system to the appropriate folder.
After you choose the appropriate folder path, the 'Select SCC Provider' dialog ·
displays, listing all SCC providers that are installed on the current workstation;
choose the SCC provider to use and click on the OK button
At this point, the SCC client opens its own dialog to prompt you for ·
information; SCC products implement this functionality in varied ways, but
typically you are prompted to log in to the Version Control system, then
prompted to choose the SCC project to use and possibly a (server) folder
contained within that project
At the conclusion of this process, all of the SCC details should be filled in; you ·
can then save the definition by clicking on the Save button on the 'Version
Control Settings' dialog
Current User Displays the user name used to log on to the Version Control system that is
accessed through this configuration.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 399 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
This field is read-only; the value it displays is retrieved from the SCC client.
SCC Provider Displays the name of the SCC provider.
This field is read-only; the value it displays is retrieved from the SCC client.
SCC Project Displays the name of the SCC Project that this configuration attaches to.
This field is read-only; the value it displays is retrieved from the SCC client.
Notes
You define the SCC-specific details as part of the broader process of setting up a Version Control Configuration on ·
the 'Version Control Settings' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 400 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
CVS Settings
When you are setting up your Version Control configurations on the 'Version Control Settings' dialog, and you set the
configuration type to CVS, the dialog presents a set of fields specific to CVS-based configurations. You can then define
details such as:
The working copy folder to be used with the configuration ·
The path to the CVS command line client ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration: Type: CVS
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Version Control Settings: Type: CVS
Settings
Option Action
Working Copy Path Displays the full path of the folder that contains the local (working) copies of the
XMI Package files.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the Select Path
button.
Select Path Click on this button to choose the working copy path, by opening a file browser
dialog and navigating through the file system to the appropriate folder.
Current User This field is read-only; its value is retrieved from a file named CVS\Root, located
in the folder selected using the Select Path button.
CVS Exe Path Displays the full path of the CVS command line client executable file.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the Select Path
button.
Select Path Click on this button to specify the path to the CVS command line client, by opening
a file browser dialog and navigating through the file system to locate the
appropriate file.
VC Time-Out Value Specify the amount of time that Enterprise Architect waits for a CVS command to
complete; if the command does not complete within the allowed time, the system
displays a Time-out error message, detailing the command that failed to complete.
This single time-out value is applied to all Version Control Configurations (of types
SVN, TFS and CVS) that the user accesses from this workstation.
Notes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 401 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
When connecting to a remote CVS repository, the 'Current User' field should display the user name used to log into ·
that repository; if this does not happen, it indicates that Enterprise Architect cannot extract the user name from the
file ...\WorkingCopyPath\CVS\Root and the configuration does not work correctly
You define the CVS-specific details as part of the broader process of setting up a Version Control configuration on ·
the 'Version Control Settings' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 402 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
SVN Settings
When you are setting up your Version Control configurations on the 'Version Control Settings' dialog, and you set the
configuration type to 'Subversion', the dialog presents a set of fields specific to Subversion-based configurations. You
can then define details such as:
The working copy folder to be used with the configuration ·
The path to the Subversion command line client ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration: Type: Subversion
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Version Control Settings: Type:
Subversion
Settings
Option Action
Working Copy Path Displays the full path of the folder that contains the local (working) copies of the
XMI Package files.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the Select Path
button.
Select Path Click on this button to choose the Working Copy Path, by opening a file browser
dialog and navigating through the file system to the appropriate folder.
Subversion Exe Path Displays the full path of the Subversion command line client executable file.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the associated Select
Path button.
Select Path Click on this button to specify the path to the Subversion command line client, by
opening a file browser dialog and navigating through the file system to locate the
appropriate file.
VC Time-Out Value Specify the amount of time that Enterprise Architect should wait for a Subversion
command to complete; if the command does not complete within the allowed time,
the system displays a Time-out error message, detailing the command that failed to
complete.
This single time-out value is applied to all Version Control Configurations (of types
SVN, TFS and CVS) that the user accesses from this workstation.
Notes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 403 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
You define the Subversion-specific details as part of the broader process of setting up a Version Control ·
configuration on the 'Version Control Settings' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 404 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
TFS Settings
When you are setting up your Version Control configurations on the 'Version Control Settings' dialog, and you set the
configuration type to 'TFS', the dialog presents a set of fields specific to TFS-based configurations. You can then define
details such as:
The working copy folder to be used with the configuration ·
The user name and password to log in to the TFS server ·
The path to the TFS command line client ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Project Configuration: Type: TFS
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Version Control Settings: Type: TFS
Settings
Option Action
Working Copy Path Displays the full path of the folder that contains the local (working) copies of the
XMI Package files.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the associated Select
Path button.
Select Path Click on this button to choose the Working Copy Path. The file browser dialog
opens, through which you navigate through the file system to the appropriate folder.
Server Name Displays the name of the TFS Server that is associated with the working copy
folder specified in the 'Working Copy Path' field.
This field is read-only; Enterprise Architect retrieves the value it displays by
querying the TFS client.
Workspace Name Displays the name of the TFS Workspace that is associated with the working copy
folder specified in the 'Working Copy Path' field.
This field is read-only; Enterprise Architect retrieves the value it displays by
querying the TFS client.
User Name Type in the user name with which to log into the TFS Server.
Password Type in the password with which to log into the TFS Server.
Display Name TFS 2013 and later releases use a Display Name to report on who owns a checkout
lock on a file. TFS 2010 uses AccountID when reporting lock owners and so does
not require a Display Name.
If using TFS 2013, type in your TFS Display Name as shown in the User column of
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 405 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
the Visual Studio Source Control Explorer when you checkout a file.
Checkout Locks Required This checkbox defaults to selected.
TFS 2013 supports the use of Local workspaces, but these do not support checkout
locks. If you want to use TFS Local workspaces (not recommended), you must
deselect this checkbox. Otherwise, leave the checkbox selected.
It is recommended that all workspaces used for Version Controlling Enterprise
Architect Package files are set as 'Server' workspaces.
TFS Exe Path Displays the full path of the TFS command line client executable file.
This field is read-only; its value can only be set through use of the associated Select
Path button.
Select Path Click on this button to specify the path to the TFS command line client.
The file browser dialog opens, through which you navigate through the file system
to the appropriate folder.
VC Time-Out Value Type in the number of seconds that Enterprise Architect should wait for a TFS
command to complete; if a command does not complete within this allowed time,
the system displays a Time-out error message, detailing the command that failed to
complete.
This single time-out value is applied to all Version Control configurations (of types
SVN, TFS and CVS) that the user accesses from this workstation.
Notes
If you automatically log in to TFS through a path external to Enterprise Architect (for example, through MS ·
Integrated Security), you can leave the 'User Name' and 'Password' fields blank
If the 'Password' field is blank, Enterprise Architect retrieves your Windows username and uses that value when ·
determining whether a Package file is checked out to you or to another user
TFS Version Control can also be accessed using the TFS MSSCCI client; to make use of the TFS MSSCCI client, ·
please define an SCC based Version Control configuration
You define the TFS-specific details as part of the broader process of setting up a Version Control configuration on ·
the 'Version Control Settings' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 406 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Use Version Control
Once your Version Control product is installed and you have created a suitable environment, Enterprise Architect can
make use of that environment to control the Packages in your project. Version Control provides a range of facilities, as
outlined in this table.
Facilities
Facility Detail
Define Version Control
SettingsVersion Control Configurations are used by Enterprise Architect to communicate
with your Version Control system.
You define one or more Version Control configurations in your project and then use
those configurations to control the Packages in your project.
Configure a Package To put a Package under Version Control you mark the Package as a controlled
Package, specify the Version Control configuration to control it, and associate an
XMI file with the Package.
Check In a Model Branch Checks in all Packages involved in a particular unit of work, as a single operation.
Checking-in updates the reference version of a Package or group of Packages in the
model.
Check Out a Model Branch Checks out all Packages within a selected model branch as a single operation, so
that you can update modeling objects within them.
Check In a Package Checks in the Package currently selected in the Project Browser.
Checking-in updates the reference version of a Package or group of Packages in the
model.
Check Out a Package Checks out the Version Controlled Package currently selected in the Project
Browser, so that you can update modeling objects within it.
Undo Check Out of a
PackageReverses the check-out of a Package, discarding any modifications that have been
made by restoring the Package content to the latest revision held in Version
Control.
Import a Package From
Version ControlRetrieves Packages from Version Control that have been created by other users, or
by you in another model, and imports them into your current model.
Apply Version Control to a
Model BranchApplies Version Control to all Packages within the selected model branch, in a
single operation.
In this context, a model branch is a Package in the Project Browser, and all of the
Packages contained within it.
Export a Version
Controlled Model BranchExports Version Control information about the root Package of a model branch, that
is used to simplify the process of exporting and importing a hierarchy of Packages
from one model to another.
Import a Model Branch
From Version ControlUses Enterprise Architect's Model Branch files, of which there are few, to retrieve
information about the root Package file and to import the model branch.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 407 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Model branch files can simplify the process of exporting and importing a hierarchy
of Packages from one model to another.
View Package Revision
HistoryDisplays the change history of Version Controlled Packages.
You can also check out a prior revision of the Package for editing, effectively
rolling-back to a prior revision of the Package.
Validate Package
ConfigurationsYou can test the validity of the Version Control settings associated with each
Version Controlled Package within your current model.
Resynchronize the Status
of Version Controlled
PackagesRe-synchronizes the Version Control status of Packages within your project with
the status reported by your Version Control provider.
Notes
Database replication should not be combined with Version Controlled Packages ·
If the Packages under Version Control contain any alternative images, you can export the images to the Version ·
Control repository when you check in the Packages, by setting the 'Export alternate images' option on the
'Preferences' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 408 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Configure Controlled Package
Once your Version Control application is set up and you have Version Control configurations in place, you can place the
individual Packages in your model under Version Control. To put a Package under Version Control, you:
Flag the Package as a controlled Package ·
Specify the Version Control configuration to control it and ·
Associate an XMI file with the Package ·
You can then export and import the Package data to and from the file and issue commands to the Version Control
system.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Package Configuration
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+Alt+P
Apply Version Control to a single Package
Step Action
1 Click on the 'Control Package' checkbox to select it, indicating that this Package is to be controlled.
2 Click on the 'Version Control' drop-down arrow and select the Version Control configuration to be used to
control this Package.
3 The 'XMI Filename' field displays a default filename for the Package export file, based on the Package
name.
Optionally, modify the filename. Either:
Type a new name, or ·
Click on the 
  button to open a file selection dialog ·
The target file must be located within the working copy folder of the selected Version Control
configuration, or one of its sub-folders.
4 The 'Version ID' field defaults to '1.0'.
Optionally, change this to a different version number.
5 The 'Owner' field defaults to your user name.
Optionally, type or select the name of the user who actually owns the Package.
6 Click on the OK button.
The 'Add Package to Version Control' dialog displays.
7 Optionally, clear the 'Keep checked out' checkbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 409 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
After applying Version Control, the Package either remains checked-out for editing, or is checked-in and
locked against editing, depending on this setting.
8 Click on the OK button.
The 'Add Comment' dialog displays.
9 Optionally, add any further comments to the default comment.
Enterprise Architect provides a default comment that includes the current date & time.
10 Click on the OK button.
The current Package is exported to the nominated XMI file, which is then committed to Version Control.
The Package icon in the Project Browser is updated to reflect the Package's Version Control status.
Notes
If you are using the Corporate or extended editions of Enterprise Architect with security enabled, these features are ·
only available to users who have been granted permission to configure and use Version Control
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 410 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Apply Version Control To Branches
It is possible to apply Version Control to all Packages within a selected model branch, in a single operation. In this
context, a model branch is a Package that is currently selected in the Project Browser, and all of the Packages contained
within it.
Access
Context Menu Project Browser | right-click on Package | Package Control | Add Branch to Version
Control
Apply Version Control to all Packages within a selected model branch
Step Action
1 On the 'Apply VC to Branch' dialog, click on the drop-down arrow in the 'Version Control Configuration'
field and select the configuration to use.
2 Optionally, tick the checkbox 'Export as Model Branch'.
Once the Version Control operation is complete a Model Branch file (.EAB file) is created for this branch.
3 Click on the OK button.
The system creates a number of sub-folders within the Version Control working copy folder, then exports
all of the Packages within the selected model branch. The system generates filenames for the XMI files,
based on the Package GUIDs.
Notes
The Version Control configuration to be used in this operation must be defined within the model before selecting ·
this command
When invoked on the model root node, this command applies Version Control to every Package within the model ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 411 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Package Version Control Options
When you have set up a Package for Version Control, you gain access to a range of Version Control operations that can
be performed on that Package, such as:
Open the dialog for working with baselines of the Package ·
Check-in and check-out single Packages or a selected hierarchy of Packages ·
Update Packages to the latest revision from the Version Control repository ·
Inspect the revision history or properties of the XMI file associated with a Package ·
Revert a Package to a previous revision ·
Compare the current model content of a Package, against the latest revision of the Package in Version Control ·
Import and export hierarchies of Packages (model branches) to and from the model, through the Version Control ·
system
Synchronize the status of a Package, with the Version Control system ·
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Version Controlled Package > Package Control
Options
Option Action
Check In Branch Check-in Packages contained in the currently selected model branch (that is, the
selected Package and all of its child Packages).
The 'Select Packages to Check In' dialog lists all Version Controlled Packages
within that branch that are checked out to you; you can then select Packages in the
displayed list, to be submitted for check-in.
You can also choose to keep the Packages checked-out after committing a new
revision to Version Control.
Check Out Branch Recursively check out all Packages contained within the currently selected model
branch (that is, the selected Package and all of its child Packages) that are Version
Controlled and checked-in.
Check In Commit a new revision of the currently selected Package to the Version Control
repository and lock the Package against further editing.
Only available for Packages that you have checked-out yourself.
Check Out Synchronize the currently selected Package with the latest revision from the
Version Control repository and unlock the Package to allow editing.
Only available for Packages that are not already checked-out (and whose associated
Package file is not checked-out).
Undo Check Out Restore the selected Package to the latest revision in the Version Control repository
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 412 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
and lock the Package against further editing.
Put Latest Commit a new revision of the currently selected Package to the Version Control
system, while keeping the Package checked-out.
This is equivalent to checking a Package in and immediately checking it back out
again.
Only available for Packages that you have checked-out yourself.
Get Latest Synchronize the currently selected Package with the latest revision from the
Version Control repository.
Available only for Packages that are checked in.
Get All Latest Updates all of the Version Controlled Packages in the project, to the latest revision
retrieved from Version Control.
Only updates Packages that are currently checked in.
Once the latest revisions are retrieved, the system scans all the controlled Packages
and fixes any missing cross-references by comparing the Package with its XMI 1.1
file.
If the cross-reference information in the XMI does not match the model, the system
updates the model with the information from the XMI and records this update in the
System Output window.
You can roll back such updates by selecting the entry in the System Output window
and using the context menu option 'Rollback Update' (or 'Rollback Selected
Updates' if multiple entries are selected).
Closing the model clears the entries in the System Output window ·
An entry in the System Output window is also cleared as and when you ·
roll-back the update for it
Scan XMI and Reconcile
ModelScan the Package XMI files associated with each of the project's controlled
Packages and restore any diagram objects or cross-references that are detected as
missing from the project.
This function is useful in team environments where each user maintains their own
private copy of the model database (that is, multiple private project files) and model
updates are propagated through the use of controlled Packages. It provides no
benefit when the model is hosted in a single shared database that is accessed by all
team members.
Each controlled Package is compared with its associated XMI file and, if the
cross-reference information in the model does not match the XMI, the system
updates the model with the information from the XMI and records the update in the
System Output window.
You can roll back such updates by right-clicking on the entry in the System Output
window and selecting the 'Rollback Update' option (or 'Rollback Selected Updates'
if multiple entries are selected).
Closing the model clears the entries in the System Output window; an entry in the
window is also cleared as and when you roll-back the update for it.
This functionality is invoked automatically as part of the 'Get All Latest' operation.
When working in an environment that uses a Private Model deployment and your
model contains a significant number of cross-Package references, it is
recommended that you invoke 'Scan XMI and Reconcile Model' from time to time,
following the re-importation of controlled Packages - for example, after using 'Get
Latest' to update a number of Packages - or after performing a number of Package
check-outs.
As a general rule, avoid running 'Scan XMI and Reconcile Model' while you ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 413 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
have uncommitted changes in your model; generally, you:
    - Check-out a number of Packages
    - Invoke 'Scan XMI and Reconcile Model'
    - Make your modifications
    - Commit any outstanding changes before you check-out more
       Packages and run 'Scan XMI and Reconcile Model' again
File Properties Display Version Control properties pertaining to the XMI export file associated
with the currently selected Package; this also identifies who has checked out the
Package.
File History Display change history information for the currently selected Package.
Revert to or check-out a prior revision of the Package.
Compare with Controlled
VersionCompare the currently selected Package with the latest revision of its associated
XMI file retrieved from Version Control.
Add Branch to Version
ControlApply Version Control to all Packages within a selected model branch, in a single
operation.
In this context, a model branch is a Package that is currently selected in the Project
Browser, and all of the Packages contained within it.
Export as Model Branch Export a newly created model branch from your own private copy of a model.
Import a Model Branch Retrieve a model branch and import it into either the source model or another
model.
Get Package Access Packages in the Version Control repository that are not currently available
in your model.
Re-synch Status With VC
ProviderUpdate the Version Control status value recorded for the selected Package in the
project to match the value reported by the Version Control provider, without
performing an XMI import or export.
Use this function when the Package's Version Control status recorded in your
project is out of synchrony with the Version Control status reported by your
Version Control provider.
Version Control Settings Display the 'Version Control Settings' dialog.
Notes
You set up Version Control using options from the project 'Version Control' submenu ·
If the selected Package is not under Version Control, a different set of options is available ·
If a Version Control configuration has not been defined for the model, no options for using Version Control are ·
available, only the options for configuring Version Control
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 414 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check Out a Package
When you need to work on a Version Controlled Package, you check it out. The local XMI file associated with the
Package is then checked-out from Version Control. No other user can check out the Package to make changes to it until it
has been checked in again.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Check Out
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+Alt+L
Check out a single Package
The Package file is imported into your model, and the 'Package' icon is updated to reflect the change in the Package's
Version Control status.
When working in a Private Model, if the system detects that the Package content in the model is already up to date with
the latest revision of the Package file retrieved from Version Control, then the 'Import Package' dialog displays first. This
dialog is not displayed for a Shared Model.
These options are available:
Force Reload From XMI - reload the Package from XMI regardless of whether it is up to date or not ·
Accept current Package - select to skip the process of re-importing the Package from XMI ·
Refresh model view - select to refresh the Project Browser and diagrams, by reloading the Package content from the ·
project database
Always use these settings - when selected, if you subsequently check out a Package that is found to be up to date, the ·
same settings are applied again without displaying the dialog
Notes
If you check out a Version Controlled Package whilst offline, the 'Package' icon has a red figure 8 in front of it ·
If you have selected the 'Always use these settings' checkbox and you want to reconfigure the 'Import Package' ·
dialog, press the Ctrl key whilst you select the 'Package Control | Check Out' context menu option; the dialog
displays and you can change the settings
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 415 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Undo Check Out of a Package
If you check out a Package and then decide not to proceed, you can undo the check-out and discard any modifications
that have been made, by restoring the Package content to the latest revision held in Version Control. The Package returns
to a checked-in state and subsequently can be checked out by any user, including yourself if, for example, you need to
reverse incorrect changes before checking the Package out and starting again.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Undo Check Out
Undo check out of a selected Package
A confirmation dialog displays; click on the OK button.
The latest revision of the Package is retrieved from Version Control and re-imported into your model. The icon against
the Package in the Project Browser is updated to reflect the change in the Package's Version Control status.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 416 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check In a Package
When you have finished working on the contents of a Package under Version Control, and you want to return it to the
model for other users to see, you check it in.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Check In
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+Alt+S
Check in a single Package
Step Action
1 The selected Package is exported and the 'Add Comment' dialog displays. A default comment is provided
that contains the current date and time.
Optionally, modify the default check-in comment
2 Click OK.
The Package file is checked-in to Version Control and the Package icon is updated to reflect the change in
Version Control status.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 417 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check Out a Model Branch
If you need to check out a number of related Packages involved in a particular unit of work, to update the contents, you
can do so in a single operation by checking out the whole model branch that contains them.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Check Out Branch
Check out a sub-tree of model Packages
Step Action
1 The selected root-node Package and all of its contained sub-Packages are recursively checked out.
Any Packages that cannot be checked-out are listed in a message box, with a brief description of the
problem; for example: The Package is already checked out by user 'Fred'.
2 When Project Security is enabled in Lock to Edit mode, Enterprise Architect prompts you to apply a User
Lock throughout the selected model branch before proceeding.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 418 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check In a Model Branch
If you need to check in a number of related Packages involved in a particular unit of work, and that you have updated,
you can do so in a single operation by checking in the whole model branch that contains them. You can also commit new
revisions of the affected Packages as you complete milestones, whilst keeping the Packages checked-out for further
editing.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Check In Branch
Check in Packages from within a model branch
Step Action
1 The 'Select Packages to Check-in' dialog lists all Version Controlled and checked-out Packages within the
selected model branch. By default, the entire list is selected.
Optionally:
Click an individual Package to select just that Package ·
Ctrl+click on an individual Package to add or remove it from the selection ·
Shift+click on a range of Packages to select them ·
Click on the All button to select all listed Packages ·
Click on the None button to clear the selection ·
2 Optionally, you can commit into Version Control a new revision of all selected Packages, while keeping
those Packages checked out for further editing. To do this, select the 'Keep packages checked-out after
committing new revision' checkbox.
3 Click on the OK button.
The 'Add Comment' dialog displays. A default comment is provided that contains the current date and
time. This comment is applied to all Packages that are checked in.
4 Optionally, modify the default check-in comment.
5 Click on the OK button.
The selected Packages are exported and checked-in. The Package icons are updated to reflect any change
in Version Control status. If you opted to keep Packages checked out, there is no change in status.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 419 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Update to the Latest Revision of Selected Package
When you are part of a team working in a Distributed Model environment, you will want to periodically update your
model with the changes that other team members have committed into Version Control. You can transfer the other users'
updates from Version Control into the selected Package in the Project Browser.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Get Latest
Update Package to latest revision
The local XMI file associated with the Package is updated to the latest revision from Version Control. The XMI file is
imported into your model database, updating the Package in your model.
When working in a Private Model, if the system detects that the Package content in the model is already up to date with
the latest revision of the Package file retrieved from Version Control, then the 'Import Package' dialog displays first. This
dialog is not displayed for a Shared Model.
These options are available:
'Force Reload From XMI' - reload the Package from XMI regardless of whether it is up to date or not ·
'Accept current Package' - select to skip the process of re-importing the Package from XMI ·
'Refresh model view' - select to refresh the Project Browser and diagrams, by reloading the Package content from the ·
project database
'Always use these settings' - when selected, if you subsequently check out a Package that is found to be up to date, ·
the same settings are applied again without displaying the dialog
Notes
The 'Get Latest' command is disabled for any Package that is checked-out (to anybody) in the currently loaded ·
project
When using a Shared Model environment, where all users are connected to a single model database, you should ·
reload the Package from the database, rather than using the 'Get Latest' command
If you have selected the 'Always use these settings' checkbox and you want to reconfigure the 'Import Package' ·
dialog, press the Ctrl key whilst you select the 'Package Control | Get Latest' context menu option; the dialog
displays and you can change the settings
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 420 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Update to the Latest Revision of All Packages
When you are part of a team working in a Distributed Model environment, you will want to periodically update your
model with the changes that other team members have committed into Version Control. You can transfer the other users'
updates to all Version Controlled Packages into the currently loaded project.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Get All Latest
Update all Packages in project to latest revision retrieved from Version Control
All the local XMI files for all the Version Control configurations used in the project are updated to the latest revision
from Version Control. The system then scans the Packages in the model, to determine which ones are up to date and
which are not, compared to the latest revisions of the associated Package files.
A prompt displays, providing these import options for Packages that are up to date:
Import changed files only ·
Always import ·
Prompt for each file ·
Click on the OK button. The Version Controlled Packages in your project are updated according to the option you
selected; if you chose the 'Prompt for each file' option, a prompt displays to confirm import of each file.
Notes
There is no need to re-import Packages that are already up to date - re-importing Packages first deletes them from ·
the project and then re-imports them from the XMI file, which is time consuming as well as unnecessary; we
strongly recommend using the default option 'Import changed files only'
The 'Get All Latest' command does not update any Package that is checked-out (to anybody) in the currently loaded ·
project; otherwise, any changes not yet committed to Version Control would be discarded
When using a Shared Model environment, where all users are connected to a single model database, the information ·
in the model database is always the same as, or ahead of, what is committed into Version Control; in this situation,
the Get All Latest command will simply refresh your view of the model database, by reloading diagrams or
reloading Package content in the Project Browser
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 421 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Include Other Users' Packages
Other users might be developing Packages in their own models that you could use in your model, or you might have
other models containing Packages that you want to use in the current model. Unless you are sharing an SQL database or
project file, those Packages are not automatically available to you. However, if the Packages have been placed into
Version Control, you can import them into your model as children of one of your model's Packages.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Get Package
Import Packages from Version Control into current model
Step Action
1 On the 'Get Shared File' dialog, click on the drop-down arrow of the 'Version Control Configuration' field
and select the Version Control configuration associated with the Package to retrieve.
The file list is populated with the names of files available through that configuration, for retrieval and
import into your model.
2 Click on the Package file to import into your model and click on the OK button.
The Package file is imported as a new child Package, under the parent Package you selected.
Notes
You must have access to the Package files through the Version Control system and you must define a Version ·
Control configuration through which to access those files
The Version Control configuration must use the same unique ID that was originally used to add the Package to ·
Version Control
XMI Package files associated with Packages that are already part of your project, are NOT included in the list of ·
files available for import
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 422 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Export Controlled Model Branch
Applying Version Control to a model can result in many XMI files being placed under Version Control. It might then be
hard to locate and import the file corresponding to the root of a particular model branch. Using Model Branch Files (.eab
files) overcomes this problem by making it easier to export and import Package hierarchies from one model to another.
You could export a newly created model branch from your own private copy of a model so that, for example:
Another user can import that branch into their own private copy of the same model ·
It can be imported for inclusion as a common branch in a number of different models ·
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Export as Model Branch
Create a Model Branch File to represent a Package hierarchy stored in Version
Control
Step Action
1 On the 'Export as Model Branch' dialog, in the 'EAB Filename' field, type a name for your Model Branch
File.
Alternatively, click on the 
  button and browse for the file location.
Note that the Package name is supplied as a default.
2 Click on the OK button.
A branch file is created to represent the selected Package. The branch file is committed to Version Control
using the same Version Control configuration that controls the Package you selected.
Notes
You can specify any file name, including sub-folder names, as long as the file is contained in or below the working ·
folder of your Version Control configuration
The facility is only enabled for Packages that are already under Version Control ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 423 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Import Controlled Model Branch
Applying Version Control to a model can result in many XMI files being placed under Version Control. It could then be
hard to locate and import the file corresponding to the root of a particular model branch, if you want to:
Retrieve a model branch created by another user in a private copy of a model, to import it into your own private ·
copy of the same model
Retrieve a model branch that is common in many models, for inclusion in a new model ·
Model Branch Files overcome this problem by simplifying the retrieval of Package hierarchies for use in other models.
You use Enterprise Architect's Model Branch Files, of which there are few, to retrieve information about the root
Package file - such as the name and type of the Version Control configuration for the selected Package, and the relative
filename of the Version Controlled XMI file associated with the Package. The system then uses this information to
import the branch into your model.
Prerequisites
Before you begin, you must have:
An operational Version Control environment that can be accessed by Enterprise Architect, and ·
All of the Version Controlled Package files and the model branch file associated with the model branch to import, in ·
a valid and accessible working copy folder
Access
Context Menu Right-click on target Package for import > Package Control > Import a Model
Branch
Import a Model Branch
Step Action
1 On the 'Import VC Model Branch' dialog, either:
Use the lower portion of the dialog to select a model branch file (this is the simpler option if the ·
associated Version Control configuration has already been saved in the current model; continue to
step 2)
OR
Click on the Find a Model Branch (.EAB) file button (this option is useful when you have not yet ·
defined the Version Control configuration that is associated with the model branch to be imported;
see the Manually Locating Model Branch Files topic)
2 Click on the drop-down arrow in the 'Select a Version Control Configuration' field and select a
configuration.
A list of .eab files controlled by that configuration is displayed in the 'Select a Model Branch (.EAB) file'
list.
3 Select the Model Branch File you need, then click on the OK button.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 424 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The system imports the root Package specified in the Model Branch File and recursively imports and
populates all the sub-Packages contained in the root Package.
Notes
The Import a Model Branch command is only enabled for Packages that you (the current user) are able to edit, as the ·
imported model branch is inserted into the model under your selected Package
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 425 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Manually Locating Model Branch Files
When importing a Model Branch File from Version Control, you might not have the associated Version Control
configuration saved in the model that is receiving the import. In this situation, it is simpler to manually browse the file
system to locate the Model Branch File (.eab) and let Enterprise Architect derive the details of the configuration from the
branch file you select.
Prerequisites
Before you begin, you must have:
An operational Version Control environment that can be accessed by Enterprise Architect, and ·
All of the Version Controlled Package files and the model branch file associated with the model branch to import, in ·
a valid and accessible working copy folder
Access
Context Menu Right-click on target Package for import > Package Control > Import a Model
Branch : Find a Model Branch (.EAB) file
Locate the Model Branch File
Step Action
1 Access the 'Import VC Model Branch' dialog, then browse for and select the Model Branch File that
represents the model branch to import.
2 Click on the Open button.
If the Version Control configuration referenced by the file is fully defined within the current model, the
import commences at this point.
Otherwise, Enterprise Architect displays a dialog prompting you to complete the required configuration.
3 Click 'Yes' to proceed with completing the definition of the Version Control configuration.
The 'Version Control Settings' dialog is displayed.
4 Complete the definition of the configuration.
(Typically this involves simply specifying the working copy folder.)
5 Click on the Save button.
The configuration details are saved.
The import of the model branch proceeds.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 426 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
The Import a Model Branch command is only enabled for Packages that you (the current user) are able to edit, as the ·
imported model branch is inserted into the model under your selected Package
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 427 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Review Package History
It is possible to review the change history of Version Controlled Packages by examining previous revisions. If necessary,
you can check out one of these earlier revisions of a Package for editing, effectively rolling-back to that prior revision of
the Package.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > File History
Review change history of a version-controlled Package
Step Action
1 For Version Control environments using Subversion, CVS or TFS command line clients, the 'File Version
History' dialog displays.
Click on a revision number in the 'Revisions' field, to select that revision and view its log entry.
For Version Control environments using SCC based clients, your particular product opens its own 'File
Version History' dialog.
2 On the 'File Version History' dialog, you can optionally click on either:
Check Out - the selected revision of the Package file is retrieved from Version Control and imported ·
into your model as a Package that is checked out for editing; you can subsequently check in this
revision as a new HEAD revision, effectively allowing you to revert the Package to a prior revision
or
Retrieve - the selected revision of the Package file is retrieved from Version Control and imported ·
into your model, but the Package remains flagged as checked-in and cannot be modified;
subsequently checking out the Package updates it to the latest revision before it is unlocked for
editing
Notes
If the selected Package was already checked out in the current model, the Retrieve and Check Out buttons are ·
disabled
If the selected Package contains any sub-Package that is already checked-out in the current model, a warning will be ·
displayed and the retrieval or check-out will not go ahead
If you check out a prior revision of a Package, but do not want to commit it as a new revision, right-click on the ·
Package and select Package Control | Undo Check Out
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 428 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Review Package History - SCC Client
It is possible to review the change history of Version Controlled Packages by examining previous revisions. If necessary,
you can check out one of these earlier revisions of a Package for editing, effectively rolling-back to that prior revision of
the Package. The process for reviewing the change history of Packages configured for Version Control with an SCC
client (including products such as Visual Source Safe, TFS-SCC, ClearCase, Perforce, AccuRev and MKS Source
Integrity) differs from that for Subversion, CVS or TFS command line clients.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > File History
Review change history of a version-controlled Package (SCC client)
Step Action
1 The change history mechanism offered by the third party SCC provider displays.
To import a prior revision of the Package into your model, use the 'SCC History' dialog to retrieve the
revision, then close the dialog.
2 The SCC client notifies Enterprise Architect that a different revision has been retrieved. A prompt then
displays, asking whether you want to check-out the prior revision.
3 Optionally, click on either:
Yes, to check out the prior revision - the selected revision of the Package file is retrieved from ·
Version Control and imported into your model as a Package that is checked out for editing; you can
subsequently check in this revision as a new HEAD revision, effectively reverting the Package to the
prior revision
OR
No, to import the prior revision as read-only - the selected revision of the Package file is retrieved ·
from Version Control and imported into your model, but the Package remains flagged as checked-in
and cannot be modified; subsequently checking out the Package updates it to the latest revision before
it is unlocked for editing
Notes
If the selected Package was already checked out in the current model, the system does not proceed with retrieving a ·
prior revision
If you check out a prior revision of the Package, but do not want to commit it as a new revision, right-click on the ·
Package and select 'Package Control | Undo Check Out'
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 429 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Retrieve Prior Revision - SCC Client
Depending on your Version Control product, retrieving a prior revision of a controlled Package can involve a number of
prompts regarding overwriting the current local copy.
This example details retrieval of a prior revision from a TFS-SCC Version Control configuration.
Access
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > File History
Example Procedure - retrieve prior revision, TFS-SCC client
Step Action
1 Display the 'TFS File History' dialog.
2 Click on the Get button.
The TFS-SCC client displays the 'Resolve Conflicts' dialog.
This dialog offers the 'Automerge All XML Package files' option. DO NOT select this option.
It is important to prevent any merging of Enterprise Architect's XML Package files.
3 Click on the Resolve button.
The TFS-SCC client displays the 'Resolve writeable file conflict' dialog.
4 Select the 'Overwrite local file/folder' option.
The existing working copy of the Package file is overwritten by the prior revision retrieved from Version
Control.
5 Click the OK button.
The TFS-SCC client redisplays the 'Resolve writeable file conflict' dialog; it should now show no
conflicts.
6 Click on the Close button.
The TFS-SCC client redisplays the 'File History' dialog.
7 Click on the Close button.
Enterprise Architect displays a prompt, asking whether to check-out the prior revision.
8 Click on the:
Yes button to check-out the prior revision ·
No button to retrieve a read-only version of the Package, that is NOT checked-out and is NOT ·
editable
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 430 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 431 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Validate Package Configurations
Having defined the Version Control settings for your current model, you can test the validity of those settings associated
with each Version Controlled Package within the model.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Check Configuration
Validate Version Control settings
Step Action
1 The validation process scans the model database and verifies that the Version Control configuration
associated with each Version Controlled Package is fully specified in the current model. It also queries the
corresponding Version Control provider to find the status of the Package file associated with each Version
Controlled Package.
The results of the validation process are sent to the System Output window.
2 Open the 'Version Control Settings' dialog to complete the definition of any invalid or missing Version
Control configurations.
3 Click on an error message in the System Output window to highlight the corresponding Package in the
Project Browser.
4 Right-click a Package node and select 'Package Control | Configure Package' to open the 'Package Control
Options' dialog.
Correct any problems with the Version Control details for the Package.
Correct any problems with the Package's associated XMI file.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 432 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Resynchronize the Status of Version Controlled Packages
It is possible to update the Version Control status of Packages within your project to re-synchronize with the status
reported by your Version Control provider. This can be useful if you are creating copies of your project, where checking
in a Package from one copy of the model leaves the Package in the second copy of the model with an out-of-date Version
Control status.
For a given Package, the re-synchronization process queries the corresponding Version Control provider to find the
status of the Package file associated with the Version Controlled Package. If necessary, the process then updates the
Package flags within the model database, to synchronize the Package status recorded in the model with the value
reported by the Version Control provider.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Version Control > Re-Synch Status (applies to all Packages in model)
Context Menu Right-click on Package > Package Control > Re-synch Status With VC Provider
(applies to single Package only)
Resynchronize Version Control status
Step Action
1 The results of the re-synchronization process are sent to the System Output window.
2 Double-click on any result message to select, in the Project Browser, the corresponding Package.
Notes
This process does not cause any Package data to be either exported from your model to the associated Package file, ·
or imported from a Package file into your model's Package data
If a Package has been checked-out and modified with Enterprise Architect, but your Version Control provider ·
reports the Package file as checked-in, running this process marks the Package within Enterprise Architect as being
checked-in, without exporting and committing the pending changes; subsequently checking-out the Package imports
the latest revision of the Package file from Version Control, effectively discarding the uncommitted modifications
from the model
Similarly, if a Package file is checked-out to you in your local working copy folder, but not in the Enterprise ·
Architect model, running this process marks the Package within the model as checked-out, but it does not import the
associated Package file from the Version Control system; consequently, it is possible to check-in a Package from
Enterprise Architect that is potentially out of date, compared to the latest revision of the Package file within the
Version Control system
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 433 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Tracking Changes
If you want to track changes to data across your project, you can use two separate but complementary facilities -
Auditing and Baselines.
Facilities
Facility Detail
Auditing of model changes Auditing is a project-level feature, available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate
editions, that enables you to record model changes in Enterprise Architect.
By enabling this feature, model administrators can view a range of information
regarding changes, such as:
Who changed an element ·
How many elements they changed ·
When they changed the data ·
What the previous values were, and ·
What type of elements they changed ·
Baselining and differencing
to capture and roll back
changesThe Enterprise Architect Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions provide a facility
to ' baseline ' or snapshot a model branch in XMI format at a particular point in
time, and store it within the model in compressed format.
More than one baseline can be stored against a single Enterprise Architect Package;
using baselines, you can compare Packages at the current and earlier stages of
development, using the Compare (Diff) utility.
The Compare utility is available in the Professional, Corporate, Unified and
Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect; it enables you to compare the current
model with:
A Baseline ·
An exported Enterprise Architect XMI file on disk ·
A version-controlled Enterprise Architect XMI file on disk ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 434 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Auditing
Auditing is a project-level feature that model administrators can use to record model changes in Enterprise Architect.
After switching Auditing on, you can view information on changes such as:
Who changed an element ·
How many elements they changed ·
When they changed the data ·
What the previous values were, and ·
What type of elements they changed ·
Auditing does not record changes to:
Document Templates ·
Model Documents ·
Baselines or ·
Profiles ·
We provide a Quickstart procedure to help you enable Auditing and see it in action, from which point you can explore a
number of set-up options and display features.
Features
Feature Detail
The Audit View To view what has been recorded by the audit, use the Audit View, which provides
an interface to everything recorded by Auditing.
If security is enabled, you must have Audit View permission to display data in the
Audit View.
Model Views You can also obtain a snapshot of selected items in the model, using the Model
View facility.
In the Corporate, Unified or Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, you can use
this facility to automatically generate a snapshot at intervals and, if there are
changes in the items collected by the defined search, to trigger a notification to you
of such changes.
This helps you to monitor workflow and other events of concern to you.
Document Report You can generate a document report that includes the audit history information for
the selected element or Package, by choosing the basic + audit template.
Audit History Using Auditing, you can track changes to an element or connector over time.
However, enabling Auditing also enables an 'Audit History' tab in the System
Output window, which summarizes all changes made to the selected element or
connector.
Performance Issues By enabling Auditing on a project, you increase the time taken for most actions.
For most modeling tasks, this increase is insignificant; however, there are some
instances where the difference is more substantial.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 435 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
The Auditing facility is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions ·
Warning - If your site runs separate editions of Enterprise Architect, when Auditing is turned on in a project any ·
Professional edition users are locked out of the project; to restore access, turn Auditing off in the project from the
Corporate, Unified or Ultimate edition instance of Enterprise Architect
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 436 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Auditing Quickstart
It is very simple to enable Auditing and see it in action.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Audit : Audit Settings
Enable Auditing
Step Action
1 In the 'Audit View', click on the Audit Settings button.
The 'Audit Settings' dialog displays.
2 Select the 'Enable Auditing' checkbox.
3 Click on the OK button to close the 'Audit Settings' dialog.
4 Close the 'Audit View' dialog.
5 Change and save your project.
Add a new Package ·
Add a new Class ·
Add a new connector ·
Change the name of an element ·
Delete an element ·
6 Open the Audit View again and click on the Refresh (or Load) button to display a record of the changes
you have made.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 437 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Auditing Settings
Using the 'Audit Settings' dialog, you can change what is recorded by the Auditing facility and:
Define the areas of processing in Enterprise Architect to audit ·
Administer your audit records ·
Indicate the kind of model objects for which changes are to be recorded ·
Configure Auditing to record changes to only certain types of elements ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Audit : Audit Settings
Configure Settings
Option Action
Enable Auditing Select this checkbox to turn the Auditing facility on.
Audit XMI Import Select this checkbox to record changes arising from XMI importing in the audit.
As Version Control uses XMI, you must select this option to record changes from
checking out Packages.
Audit XMI Export Select this checkbox to record changes arising from XMI exporting in the audit.
As Version Control uses XMI, you must select this option to record changes from
checking out Packages.
Audit Reverse Engineering Select this checkbox to record changes arising from reverse engineering in the
audit.
Use Database Timestamp Select this checkbox to use the database server's timestamp instead of each user's
local timestamp; this improves security.
This option is not available for project files.
Clear Logs Click on this button to permanently delete all log data from the current project; use
the Save Logs button first, to save the audit records outside the project.
The system prompts you to specify whether to clear items logged over a specific
period of time.
Click on the No button to clear all log items currently held in the database ·
Click on the Yes button to display the 'Time Filter' dialog, on which you select ·
a standard time period or define your own
This function can be accessed through the Automation Interface.
Save Logs Click on this button to save a copy of the logged audit items currently held in the
project. These items remain in the project; you can use the Clear Logs button to
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 438 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
remove them.
The system prompts you to specify whether to save items logged over a specific
period of time.
Click on the No button to save all log items currently held in the database ·
Click on the Yes button to display the 'Time Filter' dialog, on which you select ·
a standard time period or define your own
This function can be accessed through the Automation Interface.
Load Logs Click on this button to load a previously saved set of logs back into the project. A
browser displays through which you select the log file to reload.
If the same record exists in both project and log file, that record is not reloaded.
Core Select this radio button to record changes to elements (including attributes and
operations), Packages, connectors and some model-level information.
Standard Select this radio button to record the same changes as for the Core option, plus
changes to some of the 'housekeeping' data for diagrams - Name, Author, Version,
Stereotype, Notes and Date Modified.
You can check for changes to diagram content and structure using the Baseline
facility for reviewing visual changes to diagrams.
Extended Select this radio button to record the same changes as for the 'Standard' option, plus
changes to project security.
Debug Select this radio button to record the same changes as for the 'Extended' option plus
changes to any database tables. Some of the auditing information will not be visible
unless the Audit View mode is set to 'Raw'.
Maintenance Select this radio button to audit changes to maintenance elements only; that is:
Package (element) ·
Requirement ·
Feature ·
Use Case ·
Actor·
Note·
Issue and ·
Change ·
Core Structural Select this radio button to audit changes to maintenance elements plus certain
structural elements; that is:
Package (structure) ·
Class·
Interface ·
Signal·
Node·
Component ·
Artifact ·
Part·
Port and ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 439 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Device ·
All Select this radio button to audit changes to all types of element.
Custom Select this radio button to audit changes to element types that you specify.
The Customize button is made available; click on this button to display a list of
element types, and select the checkbox against each element type to include in the
audit (or click on the Select All button to select every element type).
Click on the OK button to save the selection.
Notes
As the number of records increases, the performance of the Audit View reduces; it is recommended that audit ·
records that are not regularly required are saved to file, then cleared from the project, to help ensure high
performance
Connectors are audited when they are connected to an element that is included in the Audit Options ·
If security is enabled, you must have Audit View permission to turn Auditing on, and Audit Settings permission to ·
change the audit settings
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 440 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The Audit View
The Audit View provides an interface to the information that has been recorded by auditing.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Audit
Sections of the Audit View
The Audit View is divided into three main areas:
Section Description
View controls The view controls provide a variety of settings for controlling auditing and the
display of audit records.
Audit tree The audit tree displays the log items that have been recorded by auditing.
What is displayed in the tree is affected by the view controls, such as:
Sorting ·
Filter (by time) ·
Mode·
Auditing settings (what was actually recorded) ·
If synchronizing with the Project Browser, it is also affected by the Package,
diagram or element you have selected.
In the audit tree:
The green tick indicates a creation ·
The yellow pencil indicates an edit ·
The red cross indicates a deletion ·
Right-clicking an element in the audit tree (such as MyClass) displays a context
menu that enables you to locate the selected element in:
The Project Browser ·
Any diagrams in which it exists ·
Record display The record display is in two parts: the identity of the selected change, and the actual
change made.
The data in the record display is determined by the view controls and mode and, if
synchronizing with the Project Browser, by the Package, diagram or element you
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 441 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
have selected.
Identity
The identity of a change consists of:
The Windows username of the user that made the change; if security is ·
enabled, the name is of the format WindowsUsername(SecurityUser)
When the change was made ·
The path of the change; for example: Class Class1 - Attribute Att1 - Attribute ·
Constraint Constraint
Changes
Changes are displayed in a table format, showing the:
Property (or data item) name ·
Its original value before the change and ·
Its value after the change ·
If you double-click on an item in the list of changes (or right-click and select the
'Show Differences' option) the Difference window displays:
This shows the specific changes that have been made, highlighting the edited,
created, deleted or formatted characters.
Changes to the format of text in the element, made through the element 'Properties'
dialog, are not apparent in the initial table; they are visible in the Difference
window, identified by HTML formatting tags.
Notes
If security is enabled, you must have Audit View permission to display data in the Audit View ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 442 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Audit View Controls
The Audit View controls provide a variety of settings for controlling auditing and the display of audit records.
Options
Option Action
Load or Refresh Click to reload the Audit Tree, updated with any new audit results.
Search Click to search through log items for a particular area - you can search by Name,
Type or GUID.
The items are loaded and filtered with the current Sort By, Time Filter and Mode
settings.
If you refresh the Audit View, you must run the search again.
Audit Settings Click to open the 'Audit Settings' dialog.
Sort-by Select the appropriate radio button for the required display setting:
Type - changes are grouped under element type (such as Class or ·
Requirement), and then grouped under the changed element
User - changes are grouped under user name, each with the number of changes ·
for that user
Under each user name, changes are grouped as for the Type sort
Filter By Date/Time Select to enable the Filter Settings button, to filter the audit results by time period.
Changes that occur outside the selected filter period are not shown in the Audit
View.
Filter Settings Click to display the 'Time Filter' dialog, to set the filter time period:
Today - to display changes occurring today ·
Previous Hour - to display changes occurring in the last 60 minutes ·
Previous 24 Hours - to display changes occurring in the last 24 hours ·
Previous Week - to display changes occurring in the last 7 days ·
Previous 30 Days - to display changes occurring in the last 30 days ·
Previous Year - to display changes occurring in the last 365 days ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 443 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Custom - to define your own time period, using the From and To fields ·
The six pre-configured time periods automatically update when you click on the
Refresh button; custom periods are static and do not automatically update.
If you have set a filter period, and you deselect the 'Filter By Date/Time' checkbox,
the period remains set; the custom time period, too, is retained so that you can
re-use it or modify it later if required.
Status Text Read to see which:
Mode has been selected and ·
Time filter is being applied to the data ·
Mode Click to display a menu of options to change the mode of the Audit View.
Select:
'Standard' - to automatically synchronize with the Project Browser; where ·
changes have been made, the Audit View reflects your selection from the
Project Browser - if you click on:
    - An element, the Audit View displays the history for that element
    - A Package, the Audit View displays the history for that Package
       and its immediate children (but not the contents of nested Packages)
    - A diagram, the Audit View displays the history for that diagram and
       its contents (which could be drawn from a wide area of the Project
       Browser)
'Advanced' - to load large sets of log items independent of the Project Browser; ·
in this mode, a special Audit Settings group can be displayed in the Audit Tree,
which records:
    - When Auditing has been enabled and disabled
    - Who made the change
    - The date and time of the change
    - Changes to the Audit Settings
    - When Audit Operations are executed
    - Security changes (which can be browsed in the same way as
       other changes)
'Deleted' - to display only deleted records, but otherwise data is shown as in ·
'Advanced' mode; records can be sorted by element type or by user as required
'Raw' - to display all audit records in chronological order without sorting, ·
enabling you to see a progression of changes; this can be especially useful in
determining date-time inconsistencies
Any search and filtering you define still apply, enabling you to view all of
today’s changes in order, or all changes for a particular element in order, or
both
Additional database information is displayed; this additional information might
be insignificant or only in machine-readable format
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 444 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Audit History Tab
When Auditing is turned on, an 'Audit History' tab is enabled in the System Output window. The tab shows a history of
changes to whichever element or connector you have selected in the:
Current diagram ·
Project Browser ·
Audit View, or ·
Package Browser ·
As you select different elements or connectors, the 'Audit History' tab automatically updates to reflect your current
selection. For each change made to the element or connector, the tab shows:
Who made the change ·
When the change was made ·
Where the change was made ·
The value of the characteristic before the change ·
The value of the characteristic after the change ·
Access
Ribbon Start > Explore > Browse > System Output > Audit History
Notes
To see this tab, you must have the Audit View open; the tab continues to display if you subsequently close the Audit ·
View
If security is enabled, you must have Audit View permission to display data on the 'Audit History' tab ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 445 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Auditing Performance Issues
Enabling auditing on a project increases the time taken for most actions.
For most modeling tasks, this increase is insignificant; however, there are some situations where the difference is more
substantial.
Operation Delays
Operation Detail
Large Deletions Deleting large Packages or Package structures, or large numbers of elements, takes
significantly longer with auditing on.
You might disable auditing before performing such a deletion.
XMI Imports Importing XMI takes longer with auditing enabled.
A project-level option is provided for disabling auditing of XMI Imports.
Reverse Engineering Reverse engineering code takes longer with auditing enabled.
A project-level option is provided for disabling auditing of reverse engineering.
Replication You cannot remove replication from a model with Auditing enabled.
If you have to remove replication, disable Auditing and - if prompted to do so -
allow Enterprise Architect to roll back the database version; you can then remove
replication.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 446 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Audit View Performance Issues
The Audit View can cause slow performance, generally because of the volume of records it has to process.
Considerations and Responses
Consideration Detail
Navigating the Project
Browser Within Auditing is
SlowTry setting the time filter to a period in the immediate past, such as 'Today',
'Previous 24 Hours' or 'Previous Week'; this time period updates each time you
open or refresh the Audit View.
Save log items outside the project with the Save Logs button; if you then clear the
logs you have just saved, the load time of the Audit View is reduced.
You can reload logs into the project at any time, using the Load Logs button.
The Audit View is Slow in
Loading and Changing
ModesTry setting the time filter to a period in the immediate past, such as 'Today',
'Previous 24 Hours' or 'Previous Week'; this time period updates each time you
open or refresh the Audit View.
Save log items outside the project with the Save Logs button; if you then clear the
logs you have just saved, the load time of the Audit View is reduced.
You can reload logs into the project at any time, using the Load Logs button.
Navigating the Audit Tree
is SlowClose the 'Audit History' tab in the System Output window
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 447 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Package Baselines
Enterprise Architect includes tools to help you manage and review changes to your models over time. These tools apply
the concepts of Baselines, Differencing and Merges.
You use Baselines, Differencing and Merges essentially to compare two snapshots of a specific part of your project, to
capture the differences between them and either roll back or incorporate selected changes or all changes.
Baselines
Enterprise Architect provides a facility to create a Baseline or 'snapshot' of the contents of a selected Package and its
child Packages at a particular point in time; this enables you to later compare that branch of the model at that time with
the current state of the branch.
Baselines are stored in the same XML format as is used for Version Control, but are stored within the project in
compressed format.
You can also have parallel copies of parts of your model for team development, and create Baselines within each copy to
merge changes into the project master.
Differencing
Differencing (Diff, or Compare) helps you to explore the differences between:
The current state of a specific part of your project, and ·
Previous or parallel versions captured in a Baseline or an XMI 1.1 file on disk ·
Merges
Once Differencing is complete, you can merge information from the Baseline into the current project; it is not possible to
go the other way.
You can:
Merge information manually, change by change ·
Merge information automatically by electing to merge in all changes in one batch procedure ·
Revert completely to the original Baseline by importing the stored XMI directly ·
Merge information and elements from a Baseline in a different project, making it possible to keep multiple versions ·
of a single model in synch
The merge options are available through the toolbar, context menus and the keyboard on the 'Compare Utility' tab, which
shows the results of a comparison.
Visual differences in diagrams
Changes to a model might include:
Adding or removing elements and connectors on a diagram, or ·
Changing the position of elements or the overall layout of a diagram ·
You might believe that a diagram has changed, and select to compare it with a baseline using a ribbon option.
Alternatively, you might perform a baseline comparison on a Package or a model and select from the comparison output
any diagrams that are flagged as changed.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 448 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
Package Baseline facilities are available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
The Enterprise Architect Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions provide another facility, Auditing, which you can ·
switch on to perform continuous monitoring of changes across the project; you can dovetail your use of each facility
to meet the range of your change management requirements
If a Package under Version Control forms part of a Baseline, and that Package is checked in to the model, you ·
cannot merge the original data from the Baseline into that Package
You can also obtain a snapshot of selected items in the model, using the Model Views facility; this facility enables ·
you to automatically generate the snapshot at intervals and, if there are changes in the items collected by the defined
search, to trigger a notification to you of such changes, which enables you to monitor workflow and other events of
concern to you
If security is enabled you must have 'Baselines - Manage' permission to create, import and delete Baselines, and ·
'Baselines - Restore' permission to merge data from a Baseline; security permissions are not required to select an
existing Baseline and perform a comparison with the model
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 449 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Baselines
Enterprise Architect provides a facility to 'Baseline' (snapshot) a model branch at a particular point in time for later
comparison with the current Package state.
Baselines
Baseline comparison is most useful for determining the changes made to the model during development compared to
some Baseline saved at a crucial point - for example the completion of a phase or version iteration.
More than one Baseline can be stored against a single Enterprise Architect Package.
Baselines are particularly useful during requirements management to check for changes, additions and deletions that
have occurred since the start of the current work phase; knowing how a model has changed is an important part of
managing change and the overall development process.
Baselines are stored within the model in compressed XML format; you can save a Baseline to an external XML file for
storage or archive, or for distributing to other users working on models derived from a master project.
Baselines are generally used in conjunction with the Compare utility.
Scenario
A typical scenario for using Baselines would be:
Create the base model branch to a sufficient point to create a Baseline (checkpoint); create and store the Baseline as ·
Version 0.1a
As work continues on development, managers and developers can check the current model branch against the ·
Baseline for important modifications, additions and deletions; the Compare utility can be invoked from the Baseline
dialog to check the current model branch against the stored version
As required, minor Baselines can be created to check recent progress; these 'temporary Baselines' are useful for ·
managing change when a lot of work is being done and it is important to only see what has changed in, for example,
the last 24 hours
At sign-off or the move to a new version/phase, a major Baseline can be created to capture the new state of the model.
Minor Baselines created earlier can be deleted if required to save space
Considerations
Baselines are based on the GUID or unique ID of a particular Package:
Enterprise Architect checks for that ID as the root element within the XML document being used as a Baseline ·
When you export a Package to XML, the Package you export is the root element; likewise when you create a ·
Baseline, the current Package is the root Package of the XML Baseline
When you save information in a Version Control system, the current Version Controlled Package is again the root ·
Package of the document
It is not useful to create a Baseline by importing an XMI Package file created by Version Controlling a Package that ·
itself contains Version Controlled child Packages; that type of XMI Package file contains stubs for the child
Packages, not full information on the child Packages and elements
If a Package under Version Control forms part of a Baseline, and that Package is checked in to the model, you ·
cannot merge the original data from the Baseline into that Package
XML files must be in the same format used by the Baseline engine - currently the UML 1.3 XMI 1.1 format (plus
Enterprise Architect extensions), which contains all the information necessary to reconstruct a UML model, even a UML
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 450 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
2.x model
Notes
The Baseline facility is available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
The Compare utility is available in the Professional edition of Enterprise Architect, as well as in the Corporate and ·
extended editions
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 451 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Manage Baselines
Enterprise Architect provides a range of facilities for working with and managing Baselines.
Access
Ribbon Design > Package > Edit > Manage Baselines > Manage Baselines
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+Alt+B
Baseline Management
Create, select and process Baselines using the 'Package Baselines' dialog.
Option Action
Current Baselines For
Package: <Name>Review the Baselines for the current model branch, listed by version reference with
the highest alphabetical/numerical value at the top.
If an entry is longer than the display area, a horizontal scroll bar displays at the
bottom of the panel; use this to scroll to the text that is not shown.
Show Differences Run the Compare utility on the selected Baseline and the current model branch or
diagram, to display the differences between the two.
Restore to Baseline Completely restore the model branch from the selected Baseline.
New Baseline Create a new Baseline.
Delete Selected Delete the selected Baseline.
Load Other Baselines Display a drop-down menu that enables you to load Baselines from another model,
in either a project file or a DBMS repository.
For project files, a browser displays; locate the required project file ·
For DBMS repositories, the Windows 'Data Link Properties' dialog displays; ·
select the data provider and click on the OK button to display the 'Select Data
Source' dialog, from which you select the required project
In either case, the Connected To: message at the bottom of the 'Package Baselines'
dialog changes to the name of the alternative model.
To return the dialog to the original project, select the third option on the drop down
list: 'Load From Selected Package'.
Import File Import an XML 1.1 file from the file system as a new Baseline for this current
model branch.
Export File Export the selected Baseline to an XML file on disk.
Compare Model to File Compare the selected model branch with an XML 1.1 file on disk; a browser
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 452 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
displays, which you use to locate the file.
Options Set filters to make the comparison more specific.
Notes
Package Baseline facilities are available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 453 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Create Baselines
This topic details the basics of creating new Baselines of Model Packages.
Access
Select a Package in the Project Browser, then open the 'Baselines' dialog using one of the methods outlined here.
In the 'Baselines' dialog, click on the New Baseline button.
Ribbon Design > Package > Edit > Manage Baselines > Manage Baselines : New Baseline
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+Alt+B : New Baseline
Create a new baseline
Field Action
Name Display the Package name of the currently selected model branch.
Version Type a unique version reference for this Baseline, which can consist of any
alphanumeric characters.
The 'Package Baselines' dialog sorts the Baselines according to the value of this
field.
Include Sub-packages Include the entire sub-Package hierarchy of this branch in the Baseline; this option
defaults to selected.
If you deselect the checkbox, only the immediate contents (XMI stubs) of the
Package are included in the Baseline.
Note Edit the default current time and date to any other value.
The field is a single-line entry, for display on the 'Package Baselines' dialog (a
one-line-per-entry list).
OK Click to create a new Baseline and return to the 'Package Baselines' dialog.
Notes
Package Baseline facilities are available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 454 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
The Compare Utility (Diff)
Enterprise Architect has a comprehensive and powerful built in Compare (diff) utility, which enables you to:
Explore what has changed within a model over time ·
Explore how previous versions of a model branch differ from what is currently in the model ·
Perform a full model comparison by exporting all of Model A to XMI, then using 'Compare Model to File' from ·
within the current model (Model B)
Comparing and checking model development at various points in the process is an important aspect of managing change
and development, monitoring what is being modified and ensuring the development and design process is on track.
Using the Compare Utility you can:
Compare a model branch in Enterprise Architect with a Baseline created using the Baseline functionality (Corporate, ·
Unified and Ultimate editions)
Compare a model branch in Enterprise Architect with a Baseline stored in a different model ·
Compare a model branch in Enterprise Architect with an XML 1.1 file on disk created previously using the ·
Enterprise Architect XML export facility (user selects file)
Compare a model branch in Enterprise Architect with the current version-controlled XMI 1.1 file on disk as created ·
when using Version Control in Enterprise Architect (file automatically selected)
Access
Select a Package in the Project Browser, then open the 'Baselines' dialog using one of the methods outlined here.
In the 'Baselines' dialog, click on the Show Differences button.
Ribbon Publish > Model Exchange > Package Control > Compare Package to XMI
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+Alt+B : Show Differences
Differencing With Baselines
As a Baseline is stored within a model and contains all the information, elements and connections for a Package at a
point in time, it can be used within Enterprise Architect to track changes to model elements over time.
The Differencing engine first builds a representation of the current Package in memory, based on what is currently in the
model.
It then compares this with the stored Baseline, highlighting changes, new elements, missing elements and elements that
have been moved to other Packages.
It is possible to filter the resultant output to display only one particular kind of change: for example, additions to the
model.
If a Baseline has been created to ignore child Package content, a comparison between that Baseline and the model does
not include any child Package content in the model.
See the Example comparison.
Notes
This utility is available in the Professional, Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 455 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
You cannot compare the current model with an XMI 2.1 file; the utility can only compare with an XMI 1.1 file ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 456 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Compare Options
You use the 'Compare Options' dialog to refine the output of the Compare utility when it compares the current model
with a Baseline.
To display the dialog, either:
Click on the Options button on the 'Package Baselines' dialog, or ·
Click on the 'Compare Options' icon on the 'Compare Utility' tab toolbar ·
If the 'Compare Utility' tab shows the results of a Baseline comparison, when you click on the OK button the display
refreshes to refine the information according to the options you have selected.
Options
Option Action
Always Expand to
DifferencesAlways display the list of elements fully expanded to show changes.
If you deselect the checkbox, when the 'Compare Utility' tab is first opened it lists
the Package contents to element level, and you expand each element as required to
show the changed items.
For large branches of the model, it is better to leave the checkbox unselected.
Show Elements that are List elements that:
Have been changed since the Baseline was created ·
Are in the Baseline only (that is, have been deleted from the model since the ·
Baseline was created)
Are in the model only (that is, have been created since the Baseline was ·
created)
Have not changed since the Baseline was created (you might generally leave ·
this checkbox unselected)
Suppress these Changes Exclude:
Changes to diagrams ·
Changes to the 'Date Modified' field for an item ·
Changes to the 'Date Created' field for an item ·
Child items of a deleted item ·
Changes to advanced properties (defaults to selected) ·
Baseline Diagram Compare
OptionsSelect the checkbox to always open the first parent Package for which there is a
Baseline, when you select the diagram for comparison from the Project Browser.
Notes
Package Baseline facilities are available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 457 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check Visual Changes to Diagrams
The Baseline Diagram Compare feature is a quick and easy way to visually compare a current diagram with an earlier
version from a saved Baseline, and highlight any elements in the diagram that have been added, deleted, resized or
moved.
You can then review these changes and optionally roll back each change if needed to its previous state from the Baseline.
The changes are identified on the 'Baseline Diagram Compare' dialog and on the diagram itself. If the diagram is not
already open, the compare feature also opens the diagram.
Access
Ribbon Layout > Diagram > Manage > Compare to Baseline
Design > Diagram > Edit > Advanced > Compare to Baseline
Processing
In two of these access paths, you perform a comparison of a Package and Baseline, and then select the diagram from the
results on the 'Baseline Comparison' dialog to display the 'Baseline Diagram Compare' dialog. Refer to the Results
section and the Options table.
In the other access paths, you first select the diagram to check, and then might have the option of selecting the Package
from which to use a Baseline, on the 'Load Baselines from Package' dialog.
This dialog displays if you have NOT selected the:
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 458 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
'Always open first parent with a Baseline' checkbox on the dialog itself or ·
'Baseline Diagram Compare Options' checkbox on the 'Compare Options' dialog ·
(Selecting or clearing one of these checkboxes resets the other one as well.)
When you create a Baseline, it can be for a Package that contains one or more levels of child Package, and you might
create Baselines for the Package(s) at each level. If the diagram you are checking is at a lower level in the hierarchy,
there might therefore be a number of Baselines that contain information on the diagram, perhaps taken at different times
and capturing different changes to the diagram. The 'Load Baselines from Package' dialog provides the facility to
compare the diagram with one of a broader range of Baselines than just those from the diagram's immediate parent.
Click on the Package, and click on the OK button. In this case, or if the dialog did not display at all (the checkboxes
were selected), the 'Baselines dialog displays.
Click on the required Baseline and on the Show Differences button. The 'Baseline Diagram Compare' dialog displays.
Refer to the Results section and the Options table.
Results
The 'Baseline Diagram Compare' dialog shows the elements that have been changed on the diagram, and what kind of
change was made ('Status' field).
As you select elements on the dialog, images are shown on the diagram itself to indicate where the changed element was
and what kind of change it underwent.
Options
Option Detail
Select (click on) name of
elementThe 'Status' column indicates whether the element has been:
Moved or re-sized (Changed) ·
Deleted from the diagram (Baseline only) ·
Added to the diagram since the Baseline was captured (Model only), or ·
Deleted from its parent external Package, and there is no record in the current ·
Baseline (because the Baseline is only for the current diagram's parent
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 459 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Package)
This diagram-linked element has been deleted from the model. The element
might be found in a different baseline either in a parent Package baseline or a
different Package baseline outside of the current Package. If the external
referenced element is restored to the model, the visual comparison will be able
to resolve the missing diagram object in the current baseline.
When an item is selected, the corresponding element on the diagram is highlighted
as shown:
Deleted from the diagram ·
Added to the diagram ·
Resized or moved to a new position ·
A deleted external element on the diagram ·
The highlighted element on the diagram is marked with a colored dot, as shown, to
indicate that it is in focus.
Position the diagram to
show the selected elementTo scroll the diagram so that you can see the original (Baseline) position of an
element, double-click on the item in the list.
To scroll the diagram so that you can see the current (model) position of the
element, press and hold Ctrl while you double-click on the item.
Leave the changes in the
item as they areEnsure that the checkbox against the item is not selected.
Click on the OK button.
Roll the changes back to
the Baseline positionClick on the checkbox against each required item (or click on the Check All button
to select every item).
The 'Action' column displays the action required to roll each element's relationship
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 460 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
to the diagram back to the Baseline relationship, and on the diagram the selected
elements are represented as shown:
This deleted element will be restored ·
This added element will be removed ·
This resized/repositioned element will be put back in its original position ·
This element from another Package, deleted from the diagram, cannot be ·
restored from this Baseline
The comparison automatically shows a blue direction arrow for each reposition or
resize that has been checked. For a heavily edited diagram this might be confusing.
However, you can hide the arrow for all elements except the one currently in focus;
to do this:
Deselect the 'Visually link new and old position for checked items' checkbox ·
To roll back the changes for all items for which a checkbox is selected:
Click on the Apply button ·
Notes
Diagram Baseline facilities are available in the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 461 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Example Comparison
This diagram shows the result of a comparison between a Package (Log in/out Use Cases) in the current project and that
Package in a Baseline captured at an earlier date.
The results of the comparison are displayed on the 'Baseline Comparison' tab.
Review Changes
Aspect Description
Interpretation A hierarchy of model elements is displayed in the left-hand pane.
From the triangle-based icons and the highlighted lines on the report, it is clearly
visible which items in the hierarchy have, since the Baseline was captured, been:
Changed ·
Deleted from the model (in the Baseline only) ·
Added to the model (in the Model only) or ·
Switched to different Packages (changes in the Parent Package property) ·
If you click on an item in the left hand pane, the right-hand pane displays a table of
properties showing the values of those properties in the current model and in the
Baseline.
For each property where there is a difference between the model and the Baseline,
the row is highlighted.
The 'Compare Utility' tab enables you to perform operations (such as merging or
rolling back changes) on the reported information, using the toolbar, context menu
and keyboard.
Increase Level of Detail The right panel of the 'Compare Utility' tab might, for some fields, display only part
of the value.
It might also not be immediately obvious what a change is.
In either case, you can double-click on the property to display full details and to
highlight the exact differences; this example shows the highlighted changes to the
'Name' property.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 462 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
The Compare utility is available in the Professional, Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise ·
Architect
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 463 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Baseline Comparison Tab Options
The 'Baseline Comparison' tab enables you to perform operations on the reported information, using the toolbar, context
menu, 'Merge' dialog and certain keyboard keys.
The toolbar is at the top of the left-hand panel; the icons operate either on the comparison as a whole or on the ·
currently-selected item in the left hand panel of the 'Baseline Comparison' tab
Each item in the hierarchy has a context menu, which you display by right-clicking on the item; the options ·
displayed depend on the level of the item in the hierarchy
The 'Merge' dialog enables you to specify which changes to roll back in the model from the baseline ·
You can use a selection of keyboard keys to move up and down the hierarchy, or to roll back changes ·
Toolbar Options
Option Action
Refresh Re-run the comparison to refresh the current display.
Merge To Model Merge the values of the currently-selected item in the Baseline back into the model.
Next Change Highlight the next changed item (this skips Moved items).
Previous Change Highlight the previously-changed item.
Expand All Fully expand the selected item.
Collapse All Collapse the changed items in the selected item.
Expand To Changed Items Expand the selected item to show changed items only (in the event that you have
selected to also show unchanged items in the comparison).
Find in Project Browser Highlight the item in the Project Browser.
Log To XML Log the changes to an XML file.
A browser displays, on which you specify the file name and location.
Compare Options Display the 'Compare Options' dialog.
Manage Package Baselines Display the 'Package Baselines' dialog.
Help Display the Help topic Package Baselines.
Context Menu Options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 464 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Option Action
Merge from Baseline
Add from BaselineRestore the item in the model to the Baseline state, or restore a deleted item from
the Baseline.
Delete from Model Remove a recently-created item from the model.
Merge From Baseline (with
Options)(For the root node of the hierarchy on the 'Compare Utility' tab.)
Display the 'Merge' dialog, which you can use to specify options for rolling back
the whole model branch to the Baseline state.
Refresh (Object-level items.)
Re-run the comparison to refresh the current display.
Find in Project Browser Locate and highlight the item in the Project Browser.
Open Baseline Diagram
Compare(For a diagram listed in the comparison.)
Display the Baseline Diagram Compare window, showing differences in diagram
content and layout.
Expand All Fully expand the selected item.
Expand To Changed Items Expand the selected item to show changed items only.
Collapse All Collapse the changed items in the selected item.
Log To XML Log the changes to an XML file.
A browser displays, on which you specify the file name and location.
Compare Options Display the 'Compare Options' dialog.
Merge Dialog Options
Option Action
Changed Restore all changed items in the model branch to the Baseline state.
In Baseline Only Restore all deleted items to the model branch from the Baseline.
In Model Only Remove all recently-created items from the model branch.
Moved Restore all moved items to their original locations, as identified in the Baseline.
Full Restore from XMI Completely restore the model branch to the version held in the Baseline XMI 1.1
file, (using the 'XMI Import' function).
(This option automatically selects all the other options)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 465 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Keyboard Keys
Ctrl+ ↓ - expand and highlight the next changed item ·
Ctrl+ ↑ - expand and highlight the previous changed item ·
Ctrl+ ← - undo the changes for a selected item (roll back to the Baseline values) ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 466 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Compare Projects
A number of operations can make changes to your project that you either want to monitor carefully or not have at all.
Such events include:
Recovering from a database crash ·
Restoring a backup ·
Performing a Project Data Transfer ·
Importing from XMI, and ·
Deleting model elements ·
You might have made a copy of the original project or the purpose of the operation is to generate a copy, in which case
you can compare the size and row counts of the 'before' and 'after' copies as a convenient 'sanity check'. The copies can
be on different platforms; you have options to:
Compare a project file to another project file ·
Compare a project file to a DBMS-based repository ·
Compare two DBMS repositories ·
The comparison examines the number of project rows in each database, producing a report indicating the total records in
each and the difference in record count between the two. If discrepancies are found, you must investigate further
manually. The comparison does not examine the actual data in the tables.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Compare
Compare two projects
Step Action
1 On the 'Project Compare' dialog, select the radio button for the database types of the two projects you
want to compare:
File to File ·
DBMS to File ·
File to DBMS ·
DBMS to DBMS ·
2 In the 'Source Project' and 'Target Project' fields, type the name or connection string for the source and
target projects to compare.
3 Click on the Compare Projects button.
The results of the comparison display in the panel at the bottom of the dialog.
4 If you want to print the results of the comparison, click on the Print List button.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 467 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 468 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Maintenance
The repository is an important data store that must be maintained to ensure that it is running efficiently and that the
information it contains has integrity. Enterprise Architect has built-in features that allow you to keep the repository in
good health. These include tools to maintain the database itself, such as Repair and Compact functions (for file based
repositories), and a series of tools to manage the data and models, such as model validation and data integrity checks.
Reference data can be imported and exported from the repository, and can be shared between repositories, ensuring
consistency. The Project Browser allows repositories to be refactored easily by dragging and dropping Packages,
elements, features and diagrams to new locations. The Element Discussion and Team Library features allow the model to
be critically analyzed and reviewed.
Facilities
Facility Detail
Check the integrity of the
data in a projectIf you have a failed XMI import, network crash or other unforeseen event that could
disrupt the integrity of information in the model, it is recommended that you run a
Project Integrity Check.
Reset Auto Increment
Columns in TablesXMI Import/Export can affect the table auto increment column values and push
them towards the maximum datatype value; you can re-sequence the columns to
avoid this problem.
Upgrade an old project to
enable use of new featuresThe structure of Enterprise Architect project files is occasionally changed to
support more features; when this happens, existing project files must be upgraded
to the new format to ensure correct operation and to take advantage of all the new
features.
Rename a project If you want to rename an Enterprise Architect project, you can do so through
Windows Explorer.
Compact a project After some time, a project .EAP file might benefit from compacting to conserve
space.
Repair a project if it did not
close properlyIf a project has not been closed properly, such as during system or network outages,
on rare occasions the .EAP file does not re-open correctly.
Notes
You only rename, compact and repair models created as .eap files; these processes are not required for models stored ·
in a DBMS
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 469 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Check Project Data Integrity
If you have a failed XMI import, network crash or other unforeseen event that could disrupt the integrity of information
in the model, it is recommended that you run the Project Integrity Check function to check that your project data is
structurally complete.
You can select a variety of items to check. The integrity check examines all database records and ensures there are no
'orphaned' records or inaccurate or unset identifiers. This function does NOT check UML conformance, only the data
relationships and repository structure.
You can run the integrity checker first in report mode to discover if anything should be corrected, and then run it again in
'recover/clean' mode.
When Enterprise Architect 'cleans' the model, it attempts to recover lost Packages and elements, and generates a new
Package at the model root level called _recovered_. Check through any elements that are found and, if required, drag
them into the model proper. If they are not required, delete them.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Project Integrity
Check the data integrity of your project
Step Action
1 Open the project.
2 Select the 'Project Integrity Check' menu option.
The 'Project Integrity Check' dialog displays.
3 Select the checkbox for each check to run:
Package Structure ·
Object Structure ·
Object Features ·
All GUIDs ·
Cross References ·
Connectors ·
UML 2.0 Migration ·
4 Select either:
The 'Report Only' option to just view a report on the state of your model, or ·
The 'Recover/Clean' option to recover and clean your project; before selecting this option back up ·
your project file first
5 To write a log of the integrity check, click on the Save Results button and select a log file.
6 Click on the Go button to run the check.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 470 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
If you want to display the resulting information in a more readable layout, you can resize the dialog and
its columns.
UML 2.0 Migration
The UML 2.0 Migration check enables you to migrate the project from UML 1.3 semantics to UML 2.0 semantics. The
migration process currently converts activities that are invocations of operations into called operation actions as per the
UML 2.0 specification.
The UML 2.0 Migration option is an exclusive process that does not enable any of the other checks to be selected. When
you click on the Go button to perform the migration, a prompt displays for you to confirm the operation.
Notes
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have 'Check ·
Data Integrity' permission to perform a data integrity check
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 471 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Reset Table Auto Increment or Identity Columns
This topic explains possible impacts of XML Export/Import on table auto increment columns, and how to re-sequence
the columns whose value approaches the maximum datatype value.
Impacts
Impact Due To Impact
XML Export/Import XML Export/Import can cause gaps in the numbering sequence of auto increment
columns.
Each XML Import deletes rows from several tables; the import then adds rows
starting from the maximum value of the auto increment column.
Repeated XML imports can result in the value of the auto increment approaching
the maximum value of the database datatype; for example, SQL Server's int
datatype has a maximum value of 2,147,483,647.
Replication Large auto increment values can also arise where the project originated as an EAP
replica or design master.
The Jet engine assigns random values for auto increment columns with each XML
Import into the project.
These random values can approach the maximum range of the repository data type,
which could present a problem when the EAP project is transferred to a repository.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Reset IDs
Re-sequence auto increment columns
Step Action
1 Open the project.
2 Select the 'Reset IDs' menu option.
A dialog displays listing all non-empty tables that contain an auto increment or identity column.
The 'Rows' column shows the number of rows in the table ·
The 'Maximum ID' column shows the current maximum value of the auto increment column ·
The 'Action' column shows either 'No Action' or 'Reset', depending on how close the column value is ·
to the datatype's maximum
Tables requiring a reset are automatically selected in the list.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 472 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
3 Click on the Go button to reset the auto increment column values.
Notes
Connection to the project must be via a direct connection; IDs cannot be reset while the connection to the repository ·
is via Cloud Services
Project Auditing must be disabled before IDs can be reset ·
MySQL repositories will require re-starting of the MySQL server so that the reset auto increment columns start from ·
the reset value
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have 'Check ·
Data Integrity' permission to reset IDs
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 473 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Upgrade a Project
The structure of Enterprise Architect project files is occasionally changed to support more features. In such cases, the
project might have to be upgraded. Upgrading to the new file structure is a simple and quick process that brings your
project to the current level to:
Ensure correct operation and ·
Support all the latest Enterprise Architect features ·
Initial Check
When you load a project that was created in an earlier release of Enterprise Architect (for example, an archived project)
using a recent release of Enterprise Architect, the system determines whether the project should be upgraded and, if the
upgrade is necessary, displays the Upgrade Wizard.
The Upgrade Project Wizard
The Upgrade Project Wizard takes you through the upgrade process and:
Advises you of the necessity to upgrade ·
Advises you to back up the current project; it is essential to back up before any changes are made ·
Checks which upgrade path is required ·
Guides you through the steps to perform the upgrade ·
Opens the newly converted project ·
Notes
If you are using replication in your models, and the upgrade wizard detects that the project you are opening is a ·
replica and not a Design Master, a different upgrade path is required
Once upgraded, the project cannot be opened with the version of Enterprise Architect in which it was created ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 474 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Upgrade Replicas
Models that have replication features added might have to be upgraded differently from regular projects.
If the model is a Design Master (the root model of all other replicas) then you can upgrade the model to suit the ·
current version of Enterprise Architect; after upgrading a Design Master you should re-create the replicas, rather
than synchronizing
If the model is not a Design Master, you must first remove the replication features, then upgrade the project in the ·
normal manner; the Upgrade Wizard guides you through the steps
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 475 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Run SQL Patches
Occasionally, Sparx Systems might release a patch to correct a model fault.
The patch generally checks how many records are to be updated, and reports on what is to be done.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Run Patch
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 476 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Rename a Project
If you want to rename a project, you can only do so at the Windows file system level, using Windows Explorer.
Rename an Enterprise Architect project file
Step Action
1 If you have the project open, close it.
2 Ensure no other users have the file open.
3 Open Windows Explorer and navigate to the project.
4 Rename the project file using Windows Explorer.
5 You should keep the file extension to preserve compatibility with the default project type, as installed in
the registry at installation time.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 477 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Compact a Project
After a period of time, through general use, a project .eap file might occupy more disc space than necessary. You can
move the project to a local drive and compact the file to recover the unused space.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Compact
.EAPX/.EAP File
Compact a project
Step Action
1 If you have the project open, shut it down.
2 Ensure no other users have the file open.
3 Select the 'Compact .EAP File' menu option.
4 Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the process.
Notes
Always compact projects on a local drive, never on a network drive ·
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
Administer Database permission to compact a project
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 478 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Repair a Project
If a project has not been closed properly, such as during system or network outages or on poor network connections, on
rare occasions the .eap file does not re-open correctly. A message displays informing you the project is of an
unrecognized database format or is not a database file. In such cases, you can move the project file to a local drive and
repair it.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Integrity Check > Manage .EAPX/.EAP File > Repair
.EAPX/.EAP File
Repair a project that was not closed properly
Step Action
1 Ensure that all users are logged off the project you are attempting to repair.
2 Copy the project file to a local drive on your workstation.
3 In Enterprise Architect, select 'Start > View > Preferences' to display the 'Preferences' dialog.
On the 'General' page, deselect the 'Use Jet 4.0 - requires restart' checkbox.
4 Close and restart Enterprise Architect - you do not need to open any model, including the one you are
repairing.
5 Select the 'Repair .EAP File' menu option, and follow the on-screen instructions.
6 Once you have repaired the project, it is recommended that you perform a data integrity check.
Notes
Always repair projects on a local drive, never on a network drive ·
The 'Compact a Project' option can also repair corrupt .eap files ·
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
'Administer Database' permission to repair a project
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 479 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Reference Data
Reference data is used in Enterprise Architect to provide meta-information for the modeler, and is often seen in drop
down lists and selection boxes. It includes such things as status codes, requirement types, model authors and more.
For convenience, Enterprise Architect comes pre-configured with useful reference data, but it is best practice to review
this existing data when setting up a project and either replace or edit it to ensure it is appropriate for the project.
There are a number of different types of reference data, some of which apply at a repository level - such as status codes
and authors - and some that is more technical in nature, such as code engineering and database datatypes.
The reference data can be copied between repositories by exporting it from one repository and importing it into another;
this mechanism can save time and ensure consistency between repositories.
Project reference data can be entered and edited through the 'Configure > Reference Data' ribbon panel, and includes:
Stereotypes ·
Tagged Value Types ·
Cardinalities ·
People·
General Types ·
Project Indicators ·
Estimation Factors ·
Datatypes ·
Notes
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
'Manage Reference Data - Update' permission to update and delete reference items
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 480 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
UML Types
Using the 'UML Types' dialog you can configure stereotypes, Tagged Value types and the cardinality list for your
project. In more detail, you can:
Add, modify and delete stereotypes ·
Customize stereotypes' appearance ·
Update Shape Scripts and metafiles associated with stereotypes ·
Create and modify Tagged Values ·
Define cardinality rules ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > UML Types
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 481 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Stereotype Settings
Enterprise Architect has an extensive set of Standard Stereotypes that you can apply to any UML construct. Using the
'Stereotypes' tab of the 'UML Types' dialog, a Technical Developer can also customize the stereotypes for your project
by adding, modifying and deleting them. For information on customizing stereotypes, see the Custom Stereotypes Help
Topic.
Stereotypes can be modified to make use of metafiles (image files) or customized colors, or to make use of the Enterprise
Architect Shape Scripts to make new object shapes to determine the shape and dimensions of the object.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > UML Types
Manage Stereotypes
Option Action
Stereotype Type in the name of the new stereotype, or click on an existing stereotype in the list
in the right-hand panel.
Group name For a stereotype that applies to an element feature (an attribute or operation) type in
a name under which to group the features that have the stereotype. This is shown on
diagrams in the attributes or operations compartment of the element.
If you do not provide a group name, the label in the feature compartment defaults to
the stereotype name.
Base Class Click on the drop-down arrow and select an object type, so that the stereotyped
object will inherit the base characteristics from that existing object type.
Notes Type in any notes concerning the stereotype (and not the objects to which the
stereotype is to be applied).
None Select this radio button to use the default object appearance.
Metafile Select this radio button to use an image file for the appearance of the stereotyped
object.
Shape Script Select this radio button to apply a custom shape to the stereotyped object, which
you define using the Enterprise Architect Shape Scripting language.
Assign Click on this button to select or define the associated metafile or Shape Script to be
applied to the stereotyped object.
Remove Click on this button to remove the associated metafile or Shape Script from the
stereotype.
Fill Click on the drop-down arrow and select a default color for the background of the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 482 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
object.
This color will be applied to all occurrences of any object to which the stereotype
has been applied; if the color is subsequently changed, the change is immediately
applied to all occurrences of any object to which the stereotype was applied (as for
changes to any other property of the stereotype).
However, on elements created with the stereotype, the default color might be
overridden by other color definitions of a higher priority that have been applied to
the element, such as the 'Alternative Appearance' dialog (F4) definition.
Border Click on the drop-down arrow and select a default color for the object border.
Font Click on the drop-down arrow and select a default color for the stereotype font.
Reset Click on this button to reset the stereotyped object appearance definition to the
default object appearance.
Preview Provides a visual representation of the stereotyped object definition.
New Click on this button to clear the dialog fields so that you can define another
stereotype.
Save Click on this button to save the stereotype definition and add it to the list of current
stereotypes.
Delete Click on this button to immediately remove the selected stereotype from the list of
defined stereotypes.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 483 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Shape Editor
A Technology Developer can use the Shape Editor to specify custom shapes via a scripting language; that is, to create
Shape Scripts. These custom shapes are drawn instead of the standard UML notation. Each script is associated with a
particular Stereotype, and is drawn for every element of that stereotype.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > UML Types > Stereotypes > [select or specify a
stereotype] : Shape Script : Assign
Reference
Option Action
Format The format in which the script is written.
Import Opens a Windows browser dialog, allowing for a script file to be loaded.
Export Opens a Windows browser dialog, allowing for a script file to be saved.
Edit window The area in which a script can be written.
Preview of main A visual representation of the compiled script. Nothing displays until the Refresh
button is clicked.
Next Shape If a composite shape is defined within the Edit Window, clicking on the Next Shape
button pages through the components of the shape.
Refresh Parses your script and produces a visual example of the shape in the Preview of
main window.
OK Exit from the Shape Editor; don't forget to save your scripts from the 'Stereotype'
tab.
Notes
Shape Scripts adopt the same color gradient settings as normal elements, as defined in the 'Standard Colors' page of ·
the 'Preferences' dialog
If an element's appearance is modified by a Shape Script, many of the 'Advanced' context menu options for that ·
element are disabled
Once you have finishing writing your Shape Script, click on the OK button; to save the Shape Script you must click ·
on the 'Stereotypes' tab
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 484 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 485 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Tagged Value Types
Tagged Values are used in a variety of places within Enterprise Architect to specify additional information about an
element or connector. The 'Tagged Value Types' tab of the 'UML Types' dialog enables a Technology Developer to
rapidly create Tagged Values, using a range of predefined structured Tagged Values to create structured tags that adhere
to a specific format. For example, for model features that use the predefined tag Boolean you can use the Tagged Values
window to assign a value of True or False and no other value.
You can also add default Tagged Value names and create predefined reference data Tagged Value types and custom
masked Tagged Value types.
Any Tagged Value names created display in the drop-down lists of Tagged Value names in the 'Tagged Value' dialogs
for elements, operations and attributes.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > UML Types > Tagged Value Types
Create a Tagged Value Type
Field Action
Tag Name Type the new name of the Tagged Value.
Description Type a description of the Tagged Value.
Detail Type any additional information necessary.
New Click to begin creating a new Tagged Value.
Save Click to save the details of a Tagged Value.
Delete Click to delete a Tagged Value from the Defined Tag Types list.
Defined Tag Types A list of previously defined Tagged Values.
Notes
You can transport these Tagged Value Type definitions between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > ·
Export Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options; Tagged Value Types are exported as Property
Types
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 486 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Cardinality
The 'Cardinality Values' tab of the 'UML Types' dialog enables you to add, modify and delete values in the default
cardinality list.
The cardinality values are used to define the multiplicity of source and target elements in relationships. This is the range
of instances of the role that can be active in the relationship; for example, one employee can be assigned to tasks; for the
target role you define the range of instances (such as tasks) the employee could be assigned to.
The cardinality values are also used to define the multiplicity of a Classifying element; that is, the number of instances of
the element that can exist. For example, the Class element 'Building Walls' might have a multiplicity of 2..n, meaning
that at least two walls must exist (to support the roof) but there can be many walls if the building design required it.
The values have these formats:
*, or 0..* - zero, one or many instances ·
0..n - zero or up to n instances, but no more than n ·
n - exactly n instances ·
n..* - n, or more than n instances. ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > UML Types > Cardinality Values
Reference
Field Action
Cardinality Type the new name of the Cardinality Value.
New Type a description of the Cardinality Value.
Save Saves the Cardinality value and adds it to the Cardinality List.
Delete Deletes a Cardinality value from the Cardinality List.
Cardinality List A list of already defined Cardinality values.
Notes
You can transport these cardinality values between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 487 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
People
In your project, you can set up and configure the people and stakeholders involved in and relevant to this model; that is:
Maintain Authors involved within a project ·
Define role types that are captured within Enterprise Architect ·
Record information on project resources ·
Capture client details associated with the current model ·
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > People
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 488 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Authors
You can define the people who are working on a project, such as the authors of specific elements.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > People > Project Author(s)
Notes
If you enter multiple names, Enterprise Architect adds them separately and in alphabetical order to the 'Defined ·
Authors' list; if you then click on one of these names, Enterprise Architect displays that name only in the 'Name(s)'
field
If you type in a role, this is not added to the roles on the 'Project Roles' tab ·
You can transport these author definitions between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
Reference
Field Action
Name(s) Type the name of the person registered as a Project Author.
If you are using a Windows Active Directory, you can select names from the
directory; click on the 
  button to display the 'Select Users' dialog.
You can also type a list of names separated by semi-colons; this enables you to
define a group of people sharing a role, such as a team of Developers, Testers or
Analysts.
Do not leave any spaces between the names and the semicolons.
Role (Mandatory) Enter the role the Project Author plays in the project (such as
Designer, Analyst, or Architect).
You can type a role name or click on the drop-down arrow and select a role defined
through the 'Project Roles' tab.
Notes Type any additional notes concerning the Project Author.
New Add further Authors.
Save Add the new Author to the Defined Authors list.
Delete Removes an Author from the Defined Authors list.
Defined Authors Review the Project Authors already defined.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 489 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 490 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Select Users
If your company is using a Windows Active Directory, you can select the Project Author names from the local or
corporate-wide directory.
Access
RibbonConfigure > Reference Data > Project Types > People > Project Author(s) : 
Reference
Field Action
Object Types... Opens the 'Object Types' dialog, which provides a choice of object types that can be
used.
Locations... Defines the root location from which to begin a search.
Check Names Matches object names listed in the Enter the object names to select section.
Enter the object names to
selectSpecify object names to search for.
Advanced... Opens the 'Advanced' dialog to provide further search options.
For more information on this dialog, please refer to Windows Help and Support.
Use to
Select Project Authors from Windows Active Directory ·
Notes
Multiple Entries can be typed into the 'Enter the object names to select' section; ensure that objects are separated by ·
semicolons (for example: Name01; Name02)
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 491 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Roles
People associated with a project play a role in analysis, design or implementation, such as Application Analyst,
Architect, Developer and Project Manager. Project roles define the activities that resources can undertake.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > People > Project Roles
Reference
Field Action
Role Type or select the name of the role.
Description Type a description of the role.
Notes Type any additional information related to the role.
New Add further Roles.
Save Add the new role to the Defined Roles list.
Delete Removes a role from the Defined Role list.
Defined Roles Review the Project Roles already defined.
The 'Defined Roles' list is available for selection for any element in the model; for
example, you can select roles on the 'Project Authors' page of the 'People' dialog,
and the Resource Allocation window.
You can also specify other roles on these dialogs, but such roles are not added to
the 'Defined Roles' list.
Use to
Define role types that are captured within Enterprise Architect ·
Notes
Deleting a role has no effect on any Project Author definition having this role; the deleted role becomes a simple text ·
entry in the Project Author definition
You can transport these role definitions between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 492 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 493 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Resources
Resources are, for example, project authors, analysts, programmers and architects. That is, anyone who might work on
the system over time, either adding to the model or programming and designing elements of the system outside
Enterprise Architect.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > People > Project Resources
Reference
Field Action
Name Type or select the name of the person listed as a resource.
The resource name is available for use in Resource Management.
Organization Type the name of the organization employing the resource.
Role(s) Type or select the role the resource plays in the project (for example, Designer,
Analyst, Architect).
Phone 1, Phone 2, Mobile,
FaxType the contact telephone numbers for the resource.
Email Type the email address for the resource.
Notes Type any additional notes on the resource.
Available Resources Review resources that have already been defined.
New Add further resources.
Save Add a new resource to the Available Resource list.
Delete Delete a resource from the Available Resources list.
Use to
Record information on project resources ·
Notes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 494 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
You can transport these resource definitions between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 495 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Project Clients
Project clients are the eventual owners of the software system.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > People > Project Clients
Reference
Field Action
Name Type or select the name of the client.
Organization Type the name of the organization that employs the client.
Role(s) Type the role the client plays in the project (for example, Manager, Sponsor).
Phone 1, Phone 2, Mobile,
FaxType the contact telephone numbers for the client.
Email Type the email address of the client.
Notes Type any additional notes on the client.
Defined Clients Review clients that have already been defined.
New Add details of further clients.
Save Add a new client to the Defined Client list.
Delete Delete a client record from the Defined Client list.
Use to
Capture client details associated with the current model ·
Notes
You can transport these client definitions between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 496 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 497 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
General Types
When you create or edit the properties of an element, you define the type or status of the property by selecting from a
drop-down list that initially contains system-provided values. You can add to or replace any of these system values with
your own customized values. The properties you can customize are:
Status·
Constraint ·
Constraint Status ·
Difficulty ·
Priority ·
Test Status ·
Requirement ·
Scenario ·
Each of these can be separately managed through the 'General Types' dialog.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 498 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Status Types
In an element 'Properties' definition, the status of the element in the development management process is defined in the
element 'Status' field. You can select the appropriate value from a drop-down list, which initially contains the system
values:
Approved ·
Implemented ·
Mandatory ·
Proposed and ·
Validated ·
You can add to or replace any of these values with your own custom values. You can also assign a color band to each
status type, and define the types of element that can display those colors.
Access
Ribbon Layout > Diagram > Appearance > Configure Status Colors, or
Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Status
Customize Element Status Types
Field Action
Status Type the name of the status.
Description Type a short description of the status.
Status Type Color Using the drop-down arrow, select a color to be applied to the current status type.
Preview Displays a visual representation of an element with the selected status type color.
Restore Default Restore the status type color to its default setting.
Applies to... By default, status colors only apply to Requirement, Issue and Change elements.
You might decide to also apply these colors to other UML elements, such as Use
Cases or Classes.
To do this, click on the Applies to ... button and, in the 'Applied Status Colors' list,
select the checkbox against each element type to which to apply the status colors.
New Clear the dialog fields to create a new status.
Save Save the status, and add it to the Type list.
Delete Remove the currently selected status from the Type list.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 499 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Type Lists the current status types and descriptions for each status.
Notes
To display status colors on your diagrams, you must select the 'Show status colors on diagrams' checkbox on the ·
'Objects' page of the 'Preferences' dialog
You can transport the status types (and the colors assigned to status types) between models, using the 'Configure > ·
Model > Transfer > Export Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
Requirement, Feature, Issue and Change elements have a status color compartment, whereas the status color for ·
other elements is applied to the element shadow; to show the element shadows (and hence the status colors), select
the 'Element Shadows on' checkbox on the 'Diagram Appearance' page of the 'Preferences' dialog
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 500 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Constraint Types
In an element 'Properties' definition, each constraint on the element is defined by type in the 'Constraint' field. You can
select the appropriate value from a drop-down list, which initially contains the system values:
Invariant ·
Post-condition ·
Pre-condition ·
Process and ·
OCL·
You can add to or replace any of these values with your own custom values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Constraint
Customize Constraint Types
Option Description
Constraint Type the name of the constraint to define.
Description Type a brief description of the constraint.
Note Type any further details concerning the constraint.
New Clear the fields to define a new constraint.
Save Save the constraint definition and add it to the Defined Constraint Types list.
Delete Remove the currently selected constraint from the Defined Constraint Types list.
Defined Constraint Types Lists the currently-defined constraint types and their descriptions.
Notes
You can transport customized constraint types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 501 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Constraint Status Types
In an element 'Properties' definition, each constraint's status in the development process is defined in the constraint
'Status' field. You can select the appropriate value from a drop-down list, which initially contains the system values:
Implemented ·
Build·
Validated ·
Approved ·
Mandatory and ·
Proposed ·
You can add to or replace any of these values with your own custom values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Constraint ·
Status Types
Customize Constraint Status Types
Status
Type the name of the constraint status to define.
Make Default
To make the selected constraint status the default for all constraint 'Status' fields,
select the checkbox.
New
Clear the fields to define a new constraint status.
Save
Save the constraint status definition and add it to the Type list.
Delete
Remove the currently selected constraint status from the Type list.
Type
Lists the currently available constraint status types.
Move the selected constraint type higher or lower in the Type list.
This defines the ordering used in the Status drop down combo boxes, and in sorting
any report or list when the Constraint Status Type is used as the sort-by property.
Sort Alphabetically
Reorganize the entries in the Type list into alphabetical order.
Restore Defaults
Remove all customized constraint status values and restore the system defaults.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 502 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
You can transport customized constraint status types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > ·
Export Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 503 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Difficulty Types
Developing a particular element might be a simple task or more complex. In the element Properties definition, the level
of difficult of developing that element is defined in the 'Difficulty' field. You can select the appropriate value from a
drop-down list, which initially contains the system values 'High', 'Medium' and 'Low'. You can add to or replace any of
these values with your own custom values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Difficulty
Customize Difficulty Types
Difficulty
Type the name of the Difficulty to define.
Make Default
To make the selected Difficulty the default for all 'Difficulty' fields, select the
checkbox.
New
Clear the fields to define a new Difficulty type.
Save
Save the Difficulty definition and add it to the Type list.
Delete
Remove the currently selected Difficulty from the Type list.
Type
Lists the currently available Difficulty types.
Move the selected type higher or lower in the 'Type' list.
This defines the ordering used in the 'Difficulty' drop down combo boxes, and in
sorting any report or list when the Difficulty type is used as the sort-by property.
For example: you have several Change elements on a diagram, and you select
'Diagram View'; then you sort on the 'Difficulty' column. The 'Diagram View'
entries are grouped by difficulty, in the order you defined in this 'Type' field.
Sort Alphabetically
Reorganize the entries in the Type list into alphabetical order.
Restore Defaults
Remove all customized Difficulty values and restore High, Medium and Low.
Notes
You can transport customized Difficulty types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 504 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 505 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Priority Types
In an element Properties definition, the priority of developing that element is defined in the 'Priority' field. You can select
the appropriate value from a drop-down list, which initially contains the system values 'High', 'Medium' and 'Low'. You
can add to or replace any of these values with your own custom values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Priority
Customize Priority Types
Priority
Type the name of the Priority to define.
Make Default
To make the selected Priority the default for all 'Priority' fields, select the checkbox.
New
Clear the fields to define a new Priority.
Save
Save the Priority definition and add it to the Type list.
Delete
Remove the currently selected Priority from the Type list.
Type
Lists the currently available Priority types.
Move the selected type higher or lower in the 'Type' list.
This defines the ordering used in the 'Priority' drop down combo boxes, and in
sorting any report or list when the Priority type is used as the sort-by property.
For example: you have several Change elements on a diagram, and you select
'Diagram View'; then you sort on the 'Priority' column. The 'Diagram View' entries
are grouped by priority, in the order you defined in this 'Type' field.
Sort Alphabetically
Reorganize the entries in the Type list into alphabetical order.
Restore Defaults
Remove all customized Priority values and restore High, Medium and Low.
Notes
You can transport customized Priority types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 506 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Test Status Types
All tests defined in the Testing window and 'Test Details' dialog have a status value to show what point in the testing
cycle the test has reached. The system values you can select from the test 'Status' field are:
Not Run ·
Pass·
Fail·
Deferred and ·
Canceled ·
You can add to or replace any of these values with your own custom values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Test Status
Customize Test Status Types
Status
Type the name of the Test status to define.
Make Default
To make the selected test status the default for all test 'Status' fields, select the
checkbox.
New
Clear the fields to define a new Test status.
Save
Save the Test status definition and add it to the Type list.
Delete
Remove the currently selected Test status from the Type list.
Type
Lists the currently available Test status types.
Move the selected type higher or lower in the 'Type' list.
This defines the ordering used in the test 'Status' drop down combo boxes, and in
sorting any report or list when the Test Status Type is used as the sort-by property.
For example: you have run several tests on a Package, and you run a Test Details
report; then you sort on the 'Status' column. The report entries are grouped by test
status, in the order you defined in this 'Type' field.
Sort Alphabetically
Reorganize the entries in the Type list into alphabetical order.
Restore Defaults
Remove all customized Test status values and restore the system defaults.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 507 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Notes
You can transport customized Test status types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 508 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Requirement Types
In a Requirement definition, the requirement is categorized according to type or function, in the 'Type' field of the
Requirement 'Properties' dialog. This helps to maintain a single set of typed requirements. You can select the appropriate
'Type' value from a drop-down list, which initially contains the system values:
Display ·
Functional ·
Performance ·
Printing ·
Report ·
Testing and ·
Validate ·
You can add to or replace any of these types with your own customized values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Requirement
Customize Requirement Types
Option Description
Requirement Type the name of the requirement.
Description Type a short description of the requirement.
Weight Type a weighting to apply to the requirement type.
New Clears the dialog fields so that you can define a new requirement type.
Save Saves the requirement type details and adds it to the Defined Requirement Types
list.
Delete Deletes a selected requirement type from the Defined Requirement Types list.
Defined Requirement
TypesLists the currently available requirement types.
Notes
You can transport these requirement types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 509 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 510 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Scenario Types
In the Scenario definitions for an element each scenario is of a specific type, which you define in the 'Type' field on the
'Scenario' page of the 'Properties' dialog. You can select the appropriate value from a drop-down list, which initially
contains the system values:
Exception ·
Alternate and ·
Basic Path ·
You can add to or replace any of these system types with your own customized values.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > General Types > Scenario
Customize Scenario Types
Option Description
Scenario Type Type the name of the scenario type.
Description Type a short description of the scenario type.
Weight Type a value for the weighting to apply to the scenario type.
Notes Type any additional information to describe the scenario type.
New Clears the dialog fields so that you can define a new Scenario type.
Save Saves the scenario type and adds it to the Defined Scenario Types list.
Delete Deletes a selected scenario type from the Defined Scenario Types list.
Defined Scenario Types Lists the currently available scenario types to offer in the drop-down list of a
'Scenario Type' field.
Notes
You can transport customized scenario types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 511 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Metrics and Estimation
TCF values, EFC values and Default Hour Rate for a project are controlled from the 'Estimation Factors' dialog.
Risk, metric and effort types for a project are controlled from the 'Project Indicators' dialog.
For further information on these see the Project Management and Project Resources topics, or specifically:
Technical Complexity Factors ·
Environment Complexity Factors ·
Default Hours ·
Effort Types ·
Metric Types ·
Risk Types ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 512 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Maintenance
Within your project, you can set up Maintenance types that determine the base Problem Types to be used within the
model.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > Maintenance
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 513 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Problem Types
NOT CURRENTLY USED
For the maintenance and change control screens, you can use the 'Maintenance' dialog to set the base Problem Types that
are handled. Examples are hardware-related issues, performance problems, software bugs and network problems.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > Maintenance > Problem Types
Define Problem Types
Field Action
Problem Type Type in the name of the problem type.
Description Type a short description of the problem type.
Weight Provide a weighting to apply to the problem type.
Note Type any additional information on the problem type.
Defined Types Displays all of the pre-defined and saved problem types.
New Click on this button to clear the dialog fields so that you can add a new problem
type.
Save Click on this button to save the scenario details and add it to the 'Defined Types'
list.
Delete Click on this button to delete a selected scenario from the 'Defined Types' list.
Notes
You can transport these problem types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export ·
Reference Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
You transport the problem types together with test types as a Maintenance Types file ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 514 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Testing Types
You can use the 'Test Types' tab of the 'Maintenance' dialog to add testing types to the basic set that comes with
Enterprise Architect. Typical test types are load tests, performance tests and function tests.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Project Types > Maintenance > Test Types
Notes
You can transport these test types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export Reference ·
Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
You can either export the test types together with the default problem types, as a Maintenance Types file, or ·
separately as a Test Types file
Reference
Field Action
Test Type Type the name of the test type.
Description Type a short description of the test type.
Weight Type a weighting to apply to the test type.
Note Type any additional information on the test type.
Defined Types Displays all of the pre-defined and saved test types.
New Add a new test type.
Save Saves the scenario details and adds it to the 'Defined Types' list.
Delete Deletes a selected scenario from the 'Defined Types' list.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 515 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Data Types
Different programming languages support different inbuilt data types. It is possible for you to manage and extend this set
of inbuilt data types for a standard programming language, as well as define new programming languages for use within
Enterprise Architect.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Reference Data > Settings > Code Engineering Datatypes  or
Code > Configure > Options > Configure Code Engineering Data Types
Programming Language Datatype Options
Option Description
Product Name Click on the drop-down arrow and select the name of the programming language.
Add Product Click on this button to display a prompt for the name of a new programming
language.
Type the name and click on the OK button.
Datatype Type the language-specific name of the datatype.
Common Type Type the common (or generic) name of the datatype; for example, the Java boolean
datatype has a common datatype Boolean.
New Click on this button to clear the fields to create a new datatype.
Save Click on this button to save the newly created or updated datatype.
Delete Click on this button to delete the selected datatype.
You can delete your own custom data types, but you cannot delete any of the
predefined data types.
Defined Datatypes for
Programming LanguagesReview the list of datatypes for the selected language, and click on any that you
want to edit or delete. The details for the selected datatype display in the dialog
fields.
Notes
You do not need to set the options in the 'Size' panel ·
Once you have defined at least one datatype for a new language, that language name is added to the drop-down list ·
for the 'Language' fields in the 'Programming Languages Datatypes' dialog, in the Code Template Editor, and in the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 516 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
'Properties' dialog for each Class element within the model
You can transport these data types between models, using the 'Configure > Model > Transfer > Export Reference ·
Data' and 'Import Reference Data' ribbon options
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
'Configure Datatypes' permission to update and delete data types
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 517 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Resources Window
The Resources window is a repository of project-standard and re-usable document generation templates, MDG
Technologies, Relationship Matrix profiles, commonly-used model elements, stylesheets, UML Profiles and Patterns.
The window provides facilities for creating and modifying these structures and facilities and, in some cases, for applying
the facility to the current model directly from the window.
Access
Ribbon Start > Explore > Browse > Resources
Show > Portals > Window > Explore > Resources
Configure > Reference Data > Resources
Keyboard Shortcuts Alt+6
Resources available through the Resources window
Notes
In the Corporate, Unified and Ultimate editions of Enterprise Architect, if security is enabled you must have ·
'Configure Resources' permission to maintain Resources window items
For a number of folders in the Resources window, the right-click context menu also offers a 'Help' option that, when ·
you select it, displays a brief description of the folder
Resource Description
Document Generation The Document Generation folder holds a number of sub-folders, each of which
provides the facilities for generating a particular type of document or report from
your model.
System Templates - this sub-folder itself has sub-folders containing ·
system-defined report templates, Fragments, Cover Pages, Style Sheets and
Table of Contents definitions
You can right-click on these template names and select options to display the
template contents or to copy the template as the basis of a user-defined
template that you work on in the Document Template Editor, under a different
name; you can also select the 'Override' option to create a copy of the system
template as a user template with the same name
User Templates - this sub-folder also has sub-folders for report templates, ·
Fragments, Cover Pages, Style Sheets and Tables of Contents, but these are the
templates that you have created yourself using the Document Template Editor,
either as new or by copying and editing another template
You can right-click on these template names and select options to create,
delete, rename, modify, move or copy a user-defined template; you have
additional options to mark a report template as a Fragment, or a Fragment as a
report template, if they are suitable for this reclassification
You can also 'drag and drop' user-defined templates between user-defined
groups, and between these groups and the appropriate standard 'type' folders;
for example, from 'DavidCover' to 'Cover Pages'
Technology Templates - if you have loaded an MDG Technology containing ·
document templates, those are also listed under the Technology name
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 518 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Web Style Templates - this sub-folder contains the HTML style templates that ·
you have created as alternatives to the system-supplied <default> template
To create a new template, right-click on the folder name and select the 'Create
HTML template' option, and provide a template name; this opens the HTML
and CSS Style Editor, in which you create the template from HTML fragments
You can right-click on the template names and select options to delete the
template or modify the template contents
Defined Documents - this folder holds the Resource documents (report ·
specifications) you have created in the Document Report Generator; you can
right-click on the document name to generate documents individually or as a
batch, open the generated document, or delete the report specification
Linked Document Templates - this folder holds the non-standard Linked ·
Document templates, either user-defined or supplied with each MDG
Technology enabled on the system; you can edit or delete any of these existing
templates, or create new ones from scratch or by copying an existing template,
including the system-provided Linked Document templates
You can also re-assign the templates to different template groups, either
another of the existing groups or a new one that you create as part of the
assignment
Legacy Templates - if you are, or have been, using the original (legacy) ·
Enterprise Architect report generator, this sub-folder contains the report
templates that you use to generate the documents
You can continue to create, modify, use and delete legacy style templates, but
it is recommended that you switch to the later report generator
MDG Technologies The MDG Technologies folder lists the MDG Technologies that have been
imported directly into the Resources window. Each technology extends the
modeling capabilities and facilities of Enterprise Architect.
You can import Technologies into your project by right-clicking on the MDG
Technologies folder and selecting the 'Import Technology' menu option. The
'Import MDG Technology' dialog then gives you the option to import the
Technology to:
'User', for your individual use; the Technology is imported into the ·
%APPDATA% folder and is not listed in the Resources window
'Model', for all project users to access; the Technology is imported into the ·
Resources window
If you have any MDG Technologies in the folder, each has its own subfolder
containing the Profiles, Patterns and code modules used in the Technology. You
can right-click on these and select options to delete the Technology, review the
Patterns or Profiles, or invoke the code modules.
If you remove the Technology, it is removed from the Resources window, the
'MDG Technologies' dialog, and the model.
Consider the fact that some MDG Technologies can be large and might impose
some delays on the workstation as they load each time a user connects to the model.
Model Patterns The Model Patterns folder holds Model Patterns that have been imported into the
model from external sources, including those developed within your own
organization. Each Pattern XML file will have a matching .rtf file to explain the
Pattern to users. Model Patterns generate modeling structures (Packages, diagrams
and elements) within your model.
Matrix Profiles The Matrix Profiles folder contains a list of Relationship Matrix Profiles that you or
your team members have created using the Relationship Matrix or Specification
Manager. You simply double-click on a Matrix Profile name to quickly open the
Relationship Matrix under the settings defined in the Profile.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 519 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Favorites The Favorites folder provides a shortcut to each commonly-used element that you
have added to the folder, so that you can quickly and easily locate the elements and
add them to diagrams.
Stylesheets The Stylesheets folder contains XSL stylesheets that you or your team members
have imported into the model. These XSL stylesheets support the optional step of
converting XMI files exported from the model into alternative formats such as
HTML, XSL or source code. Stylesheets imported here are then available in the
drop-down lists on the 'XML Export' dialog and the 'Generate GML Application
Schema' dialog.
Combined with UML Profiles, this is a powerful means of extending Enterprise
Architect to generate almost any content required.
To import a stylesheet:
Right-click on the folder name and select the 'Import Stylesheet' option. 1.
Locate and select the stylesheet file in the browser, and click on the Open 2.
button.
Provide a reference name for the file, and click on the OK button. 3.
Once the stylesheet is in the folder, you can select context menu options to reload it
(if it has been changed at the source) or delete it.
UML Profiles A Profile is a source of modified or extended element and connector types that you
have developed from the UML base types. You can import each new Profile into
this folder, and then create elements and connectors of the new types by dragging
the icons from the Profile onto a diagram.
Once you have Profiles in the folder, you can select options for arranging them in
order of name or type, viewing a Profile description, or deleting a Profile.
It is possible to synchronize the Tagged Values and constraints for any elements
created from a Profile element in the Resources window.
Importing and applying Profiles through the Resources window is no longer
recommended; from Enterprise Architect release 7.0. it is recommended that you
load and apply Profiles as components of MDG Technologies.
Patterns The Patterns folder is a folder of Design Patterns that you or your team members
have imported into the model. A Pattern captures complex new elements and
features that you can drag into a diagram without having to retype or reconfigure
each element.
Within the folder, the Patterns are grouped by type. Once you have Patterns within
a group, you can select options to delete a selected Pattern or all Patterns in the
group, view a Pattern's details, or apply a Pattern to an empty diagram.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 520 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Favorites
If you have any elements that you or your team use frequently - such as the list of Actors in a system - you can add them
to the Favorites folder in the Resources window, and use that as the source for conveniently dragging and dropping
instances of or links to these elements into other diagrams. This makes it much easier to locate and use the elements as
you create and manage your model.
Access
Ribbon Start > Explore > Browse > Resources > Favorites, or
Show > Portals > Window > Explore > Resources > Favorites, or
Configure > Reference Data > Resources > Favorites
Keyboard Shortcuts Alt+6 | Favorites
Actions on the Favorites Folder
Action Detail
Add an element to the
Favorites FolderIn a diagram, right-click on the element to add ·
From the context menu select the 'Find | Add to Favorites' option ·
Switch to the Resources window and expand the Favorites folder; the added ·
element is listed within its element-type category (such as Class)
You add elements to the Favorites folder individually.
Delete an element from the
Favorites FolderRight-click on the element within the Favorites folder in the Resources ·
window
From the context menu select the 'Delete Favorite' option ·
A confirmation prompt displays; click on the Yes button ·
View Properties of an
element in the Favorites
FolderSelect and right-click on the element in the folder ·
From the context menu, select the 'Element Properties' option; the element ·
'Properties' dialog displays
Notes
When you have had the Favorites folder open for some time and other users might have been adding to it, right-click ·
on the folder name and select the 'Refresh Favorites' option to update your view of the folder with the new contents
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 521 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 522 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Sharing Reference Data
You can conveniently update your models with reference data (including Glossary and Issue information) by exporting
the data to and importing the data from .XML files to (for example):
Copy glossaries from one model to another ·
Add additional profiles by merging new stereotypes into the model ·
Update reference data from files supplied by Sparx Systems as a maintenance release ·
Copy resources, clients and so on from one model to another ·
You import data into the model automatically or manually from a reference data .XML file, exported from another model
or an iteration of the current model.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 523 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Link Reference Data to a Shared Repository
If you have a number of projects that use the same sets of reference data, you can use a central project containing that
common data as a shared repository. The common data includes system resources such as Security Users and Groups,
Glossary terms or Data Types. Shared repositories make it possible for teams working on multiple projects to leverage a
common and consistent set of system resources. Common standards and definitions can be applied across all projects
using this repository. Any time a new project is started, that project can automatically inherit some or all of these
common resources from the repository; there is no need to establish these resources again for each project.
Shared repositories apply to Database Management System (DBMS) based Enterprise Architect projects and can link all
projects residing within one DBMS.
A new DBMS based project in Enterprise Architect is initially created with its own stand-alone repository. A single step
process then allows that new project to be linked to the shared repository residing on its DBMS. Any older or
pre-existing Enterprise Architect projects can also be linked to the shared repository, taking their resource data from the
master version. This then allows for centralized management of the contents of the repository, promoting or enforcing
common usage and standards.
Any changes to the shared repository are automatically available to every participating project.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Transfer > Shared Repository
Set up a shared repository
Step Action
1 Create the script file to set up the shared repository, as explained in the next table.
2 Execute the generated SQL script using a third-party tool.
Select the repository tables to share
Option Action
Script File Type in the location into which the script file will be generated by this dialog, or
click on the 
  button and search for it.
Main Repository Type in the name of the current main repository.
Shared Repository Type in the name of the database to be used as the shared repository.
This name cannot be the same as the name of the main repository.
Table Groups In the list of table groups that can be linked to the shared repository, select the
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 524 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
checkbox against each table group to share in the repository.
Tables in each group (Read only) Review the list of database tables in the currently-selected table group.
All of these tables in the selected group will be available through the shared
repository.
Generate Click on this button to generate the SQL script to link the selected tables of the
current (main) repository to the shared repository. The script is generated into the
file location you specified in the 'Script File' field.
View Script Click on this button to open the generated script file in the default Code Editor, and
to close the dialog.
Close Click on this button to close the dialog.
Notes
This feature is not applicable to projects that are based on local project files (.eap or .feap) ·
Shared repositories are supported for MySQL, SQL Server and Oracle ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 525 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Export Reference Data
When you have a complete project set up, with fully defined project data, it is possible to capture either selected
categories or all categories of that data, and export it to a single XML file. You can then review the data, and import it to
another project or tool so that you do not have to define it all again. The exported data includes all instances of the
selected data type in the project; for example, all defined cardinality values, or all Document Style Templates.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Transfer > Export Reference Data
Select and Export Reference Data
Step Action
1 On the 'Export Reference Data' dialog, click on the '+' box against each table group you want to expand.
2 Select the checkbox against each table or table group to export.
If you select the top-level, group-name checkbox, all tables in that group are selected for export.
3 Click on the Export button.
4 When prompted to do so, enter a valid file name with a .XML extension.
5 Click on the Save and OK buttons.
This exports the data to the file; you can use any text or XML viewer to examine the file.
Notes
You can resize the 'Export Reference Data' dialog; drag the dialog edges to the size you need ·
If there are no instances of a selected data type in the project, the export does not generate any output for that data ·
type in the XML file
Currently, Standard Complexity Types cannot be directly edited and are therefore effectively standard for all ·
models; they can be listed using the Predefined Reference Data Tagged Value type ComplexityTypes
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 526 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
Import Reference Data
It is possible to import reference data into your model from an .XML file that was exported from another model or from
an iteration of the current model, either:
Manually, whenever you know there is new or changed data to apply, or ·
Automatically whenever the model is reloaded into Enterprise Architect (if the file has changed since the previous ·
import)
The automatic import checks if the source file has changed since the last import; if the file has not changed, the import
does not proceed. If the file has changed, the changed data is imported; however, you can configure the system to display
a prompt for you to allow or cancel the import.
Access
Ribbon Configure > Model > Transfer > Import Reference Data > Import File
Configure > Model > Transfer > Import Reference Data > Shared File
Import reference data manually (Import File)
Step Action
1 On the 'Import Reference Data' dialog, click on the 'Import File' tab and on the Select File button, then
select the filename to import data from.
This would be an XML file produced by the Enterprise Architect Data Exporter.
2 If you have selected a valid file, a list of available tables to import displays in the 'Select Datasets to
Import' panel.
3 Click on one or more of the tables to import.
Press Ctrl or Shift to click on multiple tables.
4 Click on the Import button to start the process.
A message displays when the import is complete; generally the process is quite fast.
Import reference data automatically (Shared File)
Step Action
1 On the 'Import Reference Data' dialog, click on the 'Shared File' tab.
2 If you are changing an existing configuration to import from a different XML file, click on the Clear
button to clear the dialog fields.
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 527 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
3 Click on the Select File button and browse for the filename to import data from.
This would be an XML file produced by the Enterprise Architect Data Exporter.
4 If you have entered the name of a valid file, a list of tables to import displays in the 'Datasets in File'
panel.
Click on one or more of the tables to import. Press Ctrl or Shift as you click on multiple tables.
5 If you prefer to control whether or not the automatic import takes place, select the 'Always prompt before
import' checkbox.
6 Click on the Import button to import the reference data now, and to enable the automatic check and import
for subsequent reloads.
Notes
Concerning General Types data:
For Statuses, Constraints, Requirements and Scenarios, the imported data is merged with the existing data; if a ·
record already exists it is updated to the new values, and if the record does not exist, a new record is added - records
are never deleted
For Constraint Status Types, Difficulty, Test Status and Priority, the complete existing list is replaced by the ·
imported list
Concerning Calendar events and event types, Team Library configurations, Patterns and Gap Matrix Profiles:
The imported data is merged with the existing data; if a record already exists it is updated to the new values, and if ·
the record does not exist, a new record is added - records are never deleted
Concerning Images; for MS SQLServer Repositories:
Importing images as reference data into a SQLServer repository is not supported when connected via Cloud Services ·
To import images as reference data you must have additional MS SQL Server permissions, so that you can perform ·
'Set Identity On/Off' commands; the role of db_ddladmin provides the required permissions; however, this approach
might not be allowed in your environment, so discuss this requirement with your DBA to find an appropriate
solution
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 528 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
Model Repository - Model Repository 16 January, 2019
(c) Sparx Systems 2018 Page 529 of 529 Created with Enterprise Architect
