Reference Cards®
ArchiMate® 3.1 Specification
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationAbout the ArchiMate®  3.1 Specification
 
The ArchiMate® Specification, a standard of The Open Group, is an open and independent modeling 
language for Enterprise Architecture that is supported by different tool vendors and consulting firms. The 
ArchiMate language enables Enterprise Architects to describe, analyze, and visualize the relationships 
among architecture domains in an unambiguous way.
Just as an architectural drawing in classical building architecture describes the various aspects of the 
construction and use of a building, the ArchiMate Specification offers a common language for describing 
the construction and operation of business processes, organizational structures, information flows, IT 
systems, and technical and physical infrastructure. This insight helps stakeholders to design, assess, and 
communicate the consequences of decisions and changes within and between these architecture domains.
The main changes between Version 3.0.1 and Version 3.1 of the ArchiMate Specification are listed below:
•  Introduced a new strategy element: value stream
• Added an optional directed notation for the association relationship
• Improved the organization of the metamodel and associated figures
• Further improved and formalized the derivation of relationships
In addition to these changes, various other minor improvements in definitions and other wording have been 
made.
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationStrategy & Motivation
Business
Layer
Applicatio n
Layer
Technolog y
LayerImplementation & Migration
ation
T
s
Mapping to the TOGAF® ADM
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationStructural Relationships Notation
Composition Represents that an element consists of one or more other concepts. 
Aggregation Represents that an element combines one or more other concepts.
Assignment Represents the allocation of responsibility, performance of behavior, storage, or 
execution.
Realization Represents that an entity plays a critical role in the creation, achievement, 
sustenance, or operation of a more abstract entity.
Dependency Relationships Notation
Serving Represents that an element provides its functionality to another element.
Access Represents the ability of behavior and active structure elements to observe or act 
upon passive structure elements.
Influence Represents that an element affects the implementation or achievement of some 
motivation element.
Association Respesents an unspecified relationship, or one that is not represented by another 
Archimate relationship. 
Dynamic Relationships Notation
Triggering Represents a temporal or causal relationship between elements.
Flow Represents transfer from one element to another.
Other Relationships Notation
Specialization Represents that an element is a particular kind of another element.
Relationship Connectors Notation
Junction Used to connect relationships of the same type.
	
 	
Relationships
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationMotivation Elements
Element Definition  Notation
Stakeholder Represents the role of an individual, team, or organization 
(or classes thereof) that represents their interests in the 
effects of the architecture.	
        
Driver Represents an external or internal condition that motivates 
an organization to define its goals and implement the 
changes necessary to achieve them.
        
Assessment Represents the result of an analysis of the state of affairs 
of the enterprise with respect to some driver.
        
Goal Represents a high-level statement of intent, direction, or 
desired end state for an organization and its stakeholders.
        
Outcome Represents an end result.

        
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Principle Represents a statement of intent defining a general 
property that applies to any system in a certain context in 
the architecture.
         
Requirement Represents a statement of need defining a property 
that applies to a specific system as described by the 
architecture.	
Constraint Represents a factor that limits the realization of goals.

Meaning Represents the knowledge or expertise present in, or the 
interpretation given to, a concept in a particular context.
Value Represents the relative worth, utility, or importance of a 
concept.Motivation Elements – continued
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationStrategy Elements
Element Definition Notation
Resource Represents an asset owned or controlled by an individual 
or organization.
    
Capability Represents an ability that an active structure element, 
such as an organization, person, or system, possesses.
    
Value stream Represents a sequence of activities that create an overall 
result for a customer, stakeholder, or end user.Value
stream
        
Course of action Represents an approach or plan for configuring some 
capabilities and resources of the enterprise, undertaken 
to achieve a goal.
	

    
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Business actor Represents a business entity that is capable of performing behavior .

	

       
Business role Represents the responsibility for performing specific behavior, to which 
an actor can be assigned, or the part an actor plays in a particular 
action or event.
	
Business collaboration Represents an aggregate of two or more business internal active 
structure elements that work together to perform collective behavior .Business
collaboration
Business interface Represents a point of access where a business service is made 
available to the environment. Business
interface
Business process Represents a sequence of business behaviors that achieves a specific 
result such as a defined set of products or business services.
	

Business function Represents a collection of business behavior based on a chosen set 
of criteria (typically required business resources and/or competencies), 
closely aligned to an organization, but not necessarily explicitly 
governed by the organization.
	
Business Layer
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Business interaction Represents a unit of collective business behavior performed by (a 
collaboration of) two or more business actors, business roles, or 
business collaborations.
	
 
Business event Represents an organizational state change.


Business service Represents explicitly defined behavior that a business role, business 
actor, or business collaboration exposes to its environment.
	
Business object Represents a concept used within a particular business domain.

	

Contract Represents a formal or informal specification of an agreement between 
a provider and a consumer that specifies the rights and obligations 
associated with a product and establishes functional and non-functional 
parameters for interaction.    
Representation Represents a perceptible form of the information carried by a business 
object. 	

Product Represents a coherent collection of services and/or passive structure 
elements, accompanied by a contract/set of agreements, which is 
offered as a whole to (internal or external) customers.Business Layer – continued
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Application component Represents an encapsulation of application functionality aligned to 
implementation structure, which is modular and replaceable.
	

		 
Application collaboration Represents an aggregate of two or more application internal active 
structure elements that work together to perform collective application 
behavior.
	

	
Application interface Represents a point of access where application services are made 
available to a user, another application component, or a node.Application
interface
Application function Represents automated behavior that can be performed by an application 
component.
	

		
Application interaction Represents a unit of collective application behavior performed by (a 
collaboration of) two or more application components.
	
	
 	
Application process Represents a sequence of application behaviors that achieves a specific 
result.
	


Application event Represents an application state change.
	


	
Application service Represents an explicitly defined exposed application behavior.
	


Data object Represents data structured for automated processing.

Application Layer
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Node Represents a computational or physical resource that hosts, manipulates, 
or interacts with other computational or physical resources.  

Device Represents a physical IT resource upon which system software and 
artifacts may be stored or deployed for execution.

System software Represents software that provides or contributes to an environment for 
storing, executing, and using software or data deployed within it.

	

Technology 
collaborationRepresents an aggregate of two or more technology internal active 
structure elements that work together to perform collective technology 
behavior.
	



Technology interface Represents a point of access where technology services offered by a node 
can be accessed.Technology
interface
Path Represents a link between two or more nodes, through which these nodes 
can exchange data, energy, or material.

Communication 
networkRepresents a set of structures and behaviors that connects nodes for 
transmission, routing, and reception of data.
	

	Technology Layer
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Technology function Represents a collection of technology behavior that can be performed by a 
node.
	


Technology process Represents a sequence of technology behaviors that achieves a specific 
result.
	


Technology interaction Represents a unit of collective technology behavior performed by (a 
collaboration of) two or more nodes.
	


 
Technology event Represents a technology state change.
	


Technology service Represents an explicitly defined exposed technology behavior.
	


Artifact Represents a piece of data that is used or produced in a software 
development process, or by deployment and operation of an IT system.
Technology Layer – continued
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationPhysical Elements
Element Definition Notation
Equipment Represents one or more physical machines, tools, 
or instruments that can create, use, store, move, or 
transform materials.
    
Facility Represents a physical structure or environment.

    
Distribution network Represents a physical network used to transport 
materials or energy. 	
	

Material Represents tangible physical matter or energy.    

      
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Work package Represents a series of actions identified and 
designed to achieve specific results within specified 
time and resource constraints.	
Deliverable Represents a precisely-defined result of a work 
package. 
Implementation event Represents a state change related to 
implementation or migration.	


Plateau Represents a relatively stable state of the 
architecture that exists during a limited period of 
time.  
        
Gap Represents a statement of difference between two 
plateaus.
        Implementation and Migration Elements
Personal PDF Edition 
®
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group. N190ArchiMate® 3.1 SpecificationElement Definition Notation
Grouping The grouping element aggregates or composes 
concepts that belong together based on some 
common characteristic.Grouping
Location A location is a place or position where structure 
elements can be located or behavior can be 
performed.Location
        Composite Elements
Personal PDF Edition 
Copyright © 2019 The Open Group. All Rights Reserved. ArchiMate® is a registered trademark of The Open Group.About The Open Group
Leading the development of open, vendor-neutral IT standards and 
certifications 
The Open Group is a global consortium that enables the achievement of business 
objectives through technology standards. Our diverse membership of more than 700 
organizations includes customers, systems and solutions suppliers, tool vendors, 
integrators, academics, and consultants across multiple industries.
Keys facts include:
•  Over 700 Member organizations, with 43,000+ participants in The Open Group 
activities from 126 countries
•  Our Platinum Members are DXC Technology, Fujitsu, HCL, Huawei, IBM, Micro Focus, 
Oracle, and Philips
•  Services provided include strategy, management, innovation and research, standards, 
certification, and test development.
• Over 90,000 TOGAF® 9 certifications worldwide
Further information on The Open Group can be found at www.opengroup.org.
Personal PDF Edition 
