MP 05 B0000043   
MITR E PRODUC T  
Enterprise Systems Engineering Theory and Practice 
Volume 2:  Systems Thinking for the Enterprise:    
New and Emerging Perspectives  
November 2005 
George Rebovich, Jr. 
 
Spons or: MITRE Project N o.: 03AAV400-C2 
Dept. No. : D400   
 
The vie ws, opinions and/or findin gs contained in this report ar e tho se of 
The MIT RE Cor poration and shoul d not  be constru ed as an official 
Governme nt position, policy , or decision, unless designated b y othe r 
documentation. Approved for P ublic Releas e; Distribution Unlimited. 
 
Case No: 05 -1483 
©2005 T he MIT RE Corpo ration. All Rights Reserved. 
 
202 Bu rlington Rd 
Bedford, MA 

Abstract 
This report introduces and disc usses new and em erging m odes of thought that are increasingly 
being recog nized as  essential to su ccessful sy stems engine ering in enterprises.   This new system s 
thinking is em erging at the inte rsection of sem inal ideas f rom modern system  thinkers, the broad 
discipline of  information technology, and the theo ry of com plex adaptive system s, particularly 
those from  evolutionary bi ology and social system s.  Part of th is new system s thinking requires a 
replacem ent of the n otion that sp ecific engineering outcom es or goa ls can always be assured w ith 
one that s eeks to shape, im prove, or increas e the v alue of engineering out comes through 
thoughtful interventi ons in the ever-inc reasing numbers of circum stances in which we are not 
fully in con trol. 
This report is one of a prelim inary series of nine volum es that  define and exam ine key building 
blocks of the evolving  field of enterprise system s engineering:  
 
Volum e 1:  Enterprise C haracteristics and Challenges 
Volum e 2:  System s Thinking (New and Em erging Perspectives) 
Volum e 3:  Enterprise A rchitectu re (Application Across the E SE Spectru m) 
Volum e 4:  Enterprise Managem ent (Pro cesses to Bridge Theory and Practice) 
Volum e 5:  Enterprise O pportunity and Risk 
Volum e 6:  Enterpr ise Activities (Ev olving Towa rd an Ente rprise) 
Volum e 7:  Enterprise A nalysis and Assessm ent 
Volum e 8:  Capabilities-Based Planning Analysis 
Volum e 9:  Enterprise R esearch and Deve lopm ent (Agile Functionality for Decision  
Superiority) 
 
The vo lumes are in tended  as gu idance for  researcher s and pr actitioners who are expanding their 
horizons from traditio nal to enterprise system s engineering. The volum es range from  the com plex 
characteristics and behaviors of  enterp rises to the ch alleng es they pose for engineering and 
technology.  They exam ine the im pacts of enterpri se processes an d leading-edge technologies on 
the evo lution  of an en terprise.  No attem pt has been m ade to tightly in tegrate these docum ents - 
some material is repeated, som e approaches m ay be slightly different.  They w ere produced under 
a D400 effort to "W rite the Book" on enterprise system s engineering, and at this junc ture, they are 
being published as variou s works in progress - loos ely coupled and evolving. 
 iii
 iv
Preface 
In his elegan tly written Wonderful Life  evolutionary biologist St ephen Jay Goul d notes that: 
When w e set our focus on the le vel of detail tha t regulates mo st common 
questions…contingency dominates and the predictability of ge neral form recedes into an 
irrelevant background.1
Gould was making a point about natural evolution and history as it played out in the Burgess 
Shale2 over the past half bil lion yea rs, but his observation rings true in 21st century civilization and 
our com plex hum an social system s.3   
In our increasingly connected an d com plex world w e must set ou r focus  on th e right “level of 
detail.”  In part, this requires we di fferenti ate between questions whose an swers we can  control in 
a determ inistic way from  those we  are unable to control but whose outcom es we  wish to influence 
or shape.  It is the la tter to which we mu st bring our knowledge of “the  predictability of general 
form[s]” t o the foreground.  Th e use of general form s to influe nce or shape s ystems engin eering 
outcom es is largely the fo cus of this report.   
Part of our knowledge of general form s com es from  the em erging field of com plex adaptive 
system s.  Com plexity encom passes a num ber of disciplines but two am ong them  – evolutionary 
biology and social systems – seem  particularly relevant to questions and problem s of “enterprise 
as social sys tem” and th e role  of system s engineer in it.4  Com plexity, with it s roots in biology a nd 
sociology, together w ith sem inal ideas from  modern system s thinkers like Ackoff and 
Garajedaghi, form the bas is for wha t is calle d the “new system s thinking” in this report.   
Many system s engineers at  MITRE are th e products of educational and work  experiences rich in 
the engineering discipline s, com puter science, physics, m athematics, and the like with the ir 
emphasis on determ inistic problem  form ulation and solution.  A num ber of system s engineers 
may therefore assum e the m odes of thought found in evolutio nary biology an d sociology are 
largely terra inco gnito  to them .  But each of us  is, in fact, the product of evolutio nary biology, as 
are our physical environmen t, the culture in  which we live, and the va rious social system s in 
                                                 
1 Wond erful Life .W.W.  Norton & Company, New York, NY.  1989.  p. 290. 
2 The Burges s Shale is a sm all lim estone quarry hi gh in the Canadian Rocky Mo untains which was fo rmed 
more than 500 million year s ago.   
3 Con sider this quotation in the con text of a human lifeti me.  The lev el of detail th at reg ulates most common 
questions are day-to -day con cerns like “will I m ake it to the office before the 8:00 AM meetin g starts ?”  That 
continge ncy dominates this kind of question can be seen by consideri ng the myriad, unforeseeable e vents that 
could influence its answer, e.g., personal illness,  traffic jams, automobile en gine trouble.  Whe n we focus on the 
level of detail th at regu lates ou r daily liv es, th e general form  of our life (e.g ., childhood, adolesce nce, form al 
schooling, work life, retirem ent) and its esse ntial pre dictabi lity can easily  recede int o the background of our 
thoughts. 
4 Complexity th eory form s a fra mework for understand ing difficu lt pro blems and applying multiple disciplines 
to their so lution.   
 v
which we operate daily.  So wh ile som e of the term inology m ay be unfam iliar, m any of the 
concepts should find deep res onance w ith our da ily lives.   
We live in a com plex world.  It is tim e to acknow ledge and  even em brace the idea so we can 
harness the power of complexity to im prove or increas e the value of eng ineering outcom es in a 
world in which we are not fully in con trol.     
 vi
Table of Contents 
1 Introdu ction 1-1  
2 The Enterp rise 2-1  
3 Moving from Trad itional Systems Engi neeri ng to Enterprise Engi neering  3-1  
4 Modes of T hought  4-1  
4.1 Analysis  4-1 
4.2 Synthesis  4-2 
4.3 Multid imensionality 4-4 
4.4 Interdependence  4-9 
5 A Framew ork fo r Harn essing Complex ity 5-1  
5.1 A System s View of Developm ent 5-1 
5.2 A System s View of Developm ent – Exam ples 5-3 
5.3 A General D evelopm ent Fram ework for Com plex System s 5-5 
5.4 Variation  5-9 
5.4.1  Altering the Frequency of Types  5-9 
5.4.1.1  Copying w ith Error  5-10 
5.4.1.2  Intern al Cop ying Mec hanisms 5-10 
5.4.1.3  Recom bining Mec hanisms 5-11 
5.4.1.4  Exploration Versus Exploitation  5-12 
5.4.2  Rules of Thum b on Encouraging Variety  5-12 
5.4.3  Extinc tion 5-14 
5.4.4  Summ ary 5-14 
5.5 Interaction 5-14 
5.5.1  How Interaction W orks:  Proxim ity and Activation  5-15 
5.5.2  How Interaction W orks:  Phys ical an d Concep tual S paces 5-17 
5.5.3  Methods of Shaping Interaction Patterns  5-18 
5.5.3.1  External Methods  5-19 
5.5.3.2  Internal Methods  5-22 
 vii
5.5.4  Summ ary 5-32 
5.6 Selection  5-32 
5.6.1  Defining Success Criteria  5-33 
5.6.2  Determining Leve l of Selection  5-39 
5.6.2.1  Selection of Agents  5-39 
5.6.2.2  Selection of Strategies  5-40 
5.6.3  Attribution of Cr edit 5-43 
5.6.4  Creating New Agents or Strategies  5-46 
5.6.5  Summ ary 5-47 
6 Applica tion to an Ent erprise 6-1  
6.1 Purposeful Q uestions  6-1 
6.1.1  System s Thinking Questions  6-1 
6.1.2  Harnessing Com plexity Questions  6-2 
6.1.2.1  Variation  6-2 
6.1.2.2  Interaction 6-3 
6.1.2.3  Selection  6-4 
6.2 Exam ples 6-5 
6.2.1  Portfolio Managem ent 6-5 
6.2.2  Evolving Enterprise P rocesses and P ractices  6-7 
7 Postscript  7-1  
 
 viii
List of Figures 
Figure 2-1.  Enterprise Model  2-1 
Figure 2-2.  Nested Na ture of Enterprises  2-2 
Figure 2-3.  Operational Definition of  Enterprise  2-4 
Figure 3-1.  INCOSE (ANSI/EIA 63 2) System s Engineering Model  3-1 
Figure 4-1.  Traditional View of Relationship Be tween Opposing Tendencies  4-4 
Figure 4-2.  Com plementary V iew of Re lationsh ip Between  Opposing Tendencies  4-5 
Figure 4-3.  Interactions P roduce Different Mode s of Behavior  4-6 
Figure 4-4.  Managem ent Style  4-7 
Figure 4-5.  Innovative A bilities  4-7 
Figure 4-6.  Slack in a System  May A ppear as Independence  4-10 
Figure 5-1.  A System s View of Developm ent 5-2 
Figure 5-2.  A General D evelopm ent Fram ework for Com plex System s 5-7 
Figure 5-3.  Organization of Di scussion on the  General Developme nt Framework 5-8 
Figure 5-4.  Strong and W eak Ties (Granov etter’s Circ le of Friends)  5-24 
Figure 7-1.  Yin Yang Sym bol 7-1 
 
 
List of Tables 
Table 5-1.  R ules of Thum b on Encouraging Variety 5-13 
Table 5-2.  D ecision Making Factors V ersus S ituations in a Com plex Social S ystem 5-43 
 ix
 x
1 Introduction 
Our society and busin ess are in the m idst of a major transformation driven by and deriving its 
character largely from  advances in  inform ation technology (IT).  Th e rate of technical change in 
processing, storage, bandwidth a nd sensing is enorm ous.  Expansio ns in other technologies (e.g., 
biotechnology) have been fueled and shaped by th ese changes.  B y dram atically decreasing the 
cost of inform ation storage and propagation the inf ormation revolu tion is reducing barriers to 
interactions am ong people, businesse s, organizations, na tions, and processes th at were previously 
isolated in sp ace or tim e.  At th e same time, alm ost paradox ically, futu re events in th is inform ation 
rich world are harder to p redict and con trol with th e resu lt tha t our world and our business are 
becom ing increasing complex.5  Why is this so?    
System s, societies and o rganizations become increas ingly com plex when chan ges o ccur that 
intensify interactions am ong their elem ents.  By reducing barrie rs to interactions the inform ation 
revolution is doing pr ecisely that.  In th is way, inf ormation can be viewed as  a mediator of 
interaction.  Thus the inform ation revolution gives rise to  the com plexity revolu tion.  For exam ple, 
financial networks allow buying and selling based on global know ledge of price m ovem ents that 
could not be assembled in the past .  One consequence is that this ability to exploit capabilities, 
such as linking financial m arkets,  for better short-run prediction  and control coul d create longer-
run difficulties of prediction and control, such as g lobal pro pagation of financia l crises.  The 
cumulative effect is that the exploitation of new inform ation t echnology to create changes viewed 
as desirable increas es the breadth  and depth of linkages and interactions whic h result in a large 
diversity of actors becom ing part of the sam e comm unity, thereby increasing overall 
interdependence which fosters com plexity.6
In an y age, the v iew we h old of our w orld is disrupte d and threatened by new  technologies of the 
era.  But ultimately we synthesize them into a new and more powerful perspective.  For example, 
astronom y threatened the view of a geocentric universe but it ultim ately led to a m ore powerful 
view of the cosm os and our place in it.  And so it is in ou r day that IT has bo th revealed the 
complexity in our social systems and accelerated  it.7  How do we form  a new and m ore pow erful 
perspective for dealing  with this com plexity ?   
                                                 
5 A system  is complex whe n there are  strong i nteractions am ong its  elem ents so that c urrent events  heavily 
influence the prob abilities of man y kinds of later events.   
6 Axelrod, Robe rt and Michael  D. C ohen.  Harn essing  Complexity:  Org anizational Implications of a Scientific 
Fron tier.  New Yo rk, NY:  Basic Bo oks, 2000. 
7 Malone, Thomas W., The Future of W ork.  Harvard Bu siness Sch ool Press.  2004.  Mal one argu es a similar  
view.  A key element of his thesis is that the cost of communication has dropped dram atically, thus 
preci pitating m ajor social changes. 
 1-1
What is needed is a new way of thinking – a system s thinking8 that captures the fundam ental 
relationships of information to com plexity so tha t designers of every kind of  enterprise can secur e 
the benef its and avoid the pitfalls  of this enorm ous change.  This  new system s thinking is rooted 
in several distinct fields but one of them  – evolutionary biolog y – is a tap root .  The use of  
evolutionary concepts to deal  with com plexity has grown in  recent years because biology has 
changed from  a passive, descrip tive science to an active, constructive  one.9  Knowledge of 
genetics is used to m anipulate and m odify chrom osomes to avoid or cure hum an diseases by 
creating new drugs or, in  some cases, by altering the geneti c makeup of individual hum ans.  W e 
clone life form s and not just simple organism s but som e profoundly com plex ones.  These 
advances and others like them  have fundam entally changed our view of and relationship to 
biology and its m odes of thought.   
As a consequence we find  ourselves poised at th e leading edge of a new system s thinking which is 
emerging at the intersection of  IT and evolu tionary biology.10  As will be see n, part of this new 
system s thin king req uires a replacem ent of the n otion th at spe cific eng ineering outcom es or goals 
can alway s be assured with one that seeks to s hape, im prove, o r increas e the v alue of eng ineering 
outcom es through thoughtful interven tions in the ever increasing numbers of circum stances in 
which we are not fully  in control.   
The purpose of this repo rt is to introduce and discuss new and em erging m odes of thought that are 
increasingly being recognize d as essential to succes sful system s engineering within an enterprise.  
The em phasis is on those that  are substantially differe nt in kind or  degree from those in traditional 
system  engineering.  Tr aditional system s thinking and processe s will always be relevant to the 
degree that the problem  is or can be constrained to a system or system -of-sy stems problem.  But 
they do not equip the system s engineer to deal with all that is going on in an enterprise.  This new 
way of thinking is m eant to s upplem ent traditiona l system s thinking, not supplant it.   
The pres entatio n app roach taken in th is report is to dis cuss the principles of a concept followed by 
an “everyday” exam ple of it.  Exam ples are dr awn f rom diverse sources and situations including 
organizational, social, t echnical, political, m ilitary, educational, governm ental, financial, m edical, 
and even board gam es. 
                                                 
8 Systems thinking is th e ability an d practice of examining the whole system  rather than trying to fix isolated  
problem s (P.  Senge) .  It requires a  syste ms perspective  which is th e act of taking into acco unt all th e beh aviors 
of a system as a w hole in the context of its environment.  This puts a focus on the interactions a nd relationship 
between the system and i ts environment (Y.  Bar Yam , NECSI).  More fundam entally, thinking refers to how 
one organizes and uses knowledge t o cope with situations:   it m ediates the pe rception of a problem  and the 
production of a response (World Book Encyclopedia).   
9 Ken neth R.  Miller, Professor of Biology, Brown Un iversity.   
10Some make the case t hat ecology is more to the point than evolutionary biology.  An ecology evolves itself 
through replacement of its elemen ts and  is in a d ynamic equilibrium which is ak in to th e development of a 
syste m of IT s ystems (from  a discussion with D. Norm an, The MITRE Corporation). 
 1-2
2 The Enterprise 
By enterp rise we m ean an en tity compri sed of interdependent resour ces (e.g., people , processes, 
organizations, technolog y, funding) that interact with each other (to, e. g., coordinate  functions, 
share inform ation, allocate funding ) and their en vironm ent to achieve goals , as depicted in Figure 
2-1.11      
 
 
Figure 2-1.  Enterprise Model 
 
Historically, our focus has been on the technologies which have enabled the developm ent of the 
piece p arts - system s and subsy stems – contained in the enterprise.  Modern system s think ers like 
Ackoff and Gharajed aghi are in creasingly taking a holistic view of an en terprise as12: 
• a multi-m inded, socio- cultural entity, 
• comprised of a voluntary association of members who can choose their goals and 
means, 
• an entity whose m embers share valu es embedded in a (largely common) culture, 
• having the attributes of a purposeful entity13, and 
                                                 
11 This definition is sim ilar in  its essen tials wi th that of Enterprise  in th e Net Centric Implement ation 
Framework , v1.0.0, 17 Dec 04, NES I. 
12 Gharajedaghi, J., Systems Thinking:  Ma nagin g Chaos and Complexity .  Boston, MA:  B utterwo rth 
Heinemann, 1999.   
 2-1
• an entity whose performance im proves through alignm ent of purposes across its 
multiple lev els. 
There has been a steady  progression towards th is enterprise model in both MITRE and its 
sponsors.  Witness th e reorganizations over the pa st decade that have elim inated various form s of 
stove-piping in MITRE (e.g., Ce nter for Air Force C ommand and Control S ystems matrix 
organization) and its sp onsors (e.g., A ir Force E lectronic Syst ems Center (ES C) movement to an 
enterp rise en gineering an d integration-based organization), as well as perform ance alignm ent 
initia tives within M ITRE,  like the P &D partnership. 
There is a nested nature to m ost gove rnment enterprises.14  At every level, ex cept the very top and 
bottom , an enterprise itself is part  of a larg er enterprise  and contains sub-enterp rises, each with its 
own people, processes, te chnologies, funding and ot her resources.  As depi cted in F igure 2-2, the 
family of Airborne Early W arning and Control (AEW&C) system s is an enterprise which is 
nested (or contained) in the Comm and and Control (C2) C onstellation enterp rise which is 
contained in the A ir Force C2 enterprise. 
 
 
Figure 2-2.  Nested Nature of Enterprises 
                                                                                                                                                       
13 A purposefu l entity can ac hieve the  same outcom e in diffe rent ways (in the sam e envi ronment) and can 
achieve different outcomes (in the same or differe nt environments).   
14The pr operty of nestedness de rives fr om the goal oriented, hierarc hical nature of most government 
organizations.  These ki nds of enterprises are the focus of this report.  This property is not seen in or to be 
expecte d of all enterprises.  For e xample, many chai n hotel enterprises a re, in fact, associations of independent 
properties that operate as agents of and on behalf of the hotel enterprise i n prov iding lodg ing and related  
services.  Th e hotel co rporation has little o r no control of and assu mes limited  respo nsibility fo r the agent 
properties.  In these arrang emen ts eith er part y can  readily term inate th e affiliatio n of the property with the ho tel 
enterprise.    
 
 
 AF C2 Enterpri se 
C2 Co nstell ation  
AEW&C
 2-2
Alignm ent of  purposes across the levels of the en terprise c an improve overall enterprise 
perform ance:  the sub-enterprises contributes to the goals of the co ntaining enterprise .  This view 
has profound im plications for how system s engineers m ust think about th eir activities w ithin an 
enterp rise se tting:  it puts a prem ium on synthesis.15
For ex ample, at th e AEW&C sys tem program  level, the view m ust be that an  AEW &C sys tem 
builds an air pictu re that s erves the hig her goal of achieving situation awaren ess w ithin the C2 
Constellation.  This requir es the AEW&C sys tems engineer  to ask (and answ er) how the 
AEW &C piece parts being develo ped serv e situatio n awarene ss in th e C2 Con stellation in 
addition  to how they  serve the AEW &C system  specificatio n.  At the n ext lev el16, the view m ust 
be that the C 2 Constellation deve lops integ rated capabilities to serve the higher goa l of providing 
net-c entric C 2 for the Air Force  C2 En terprise.  Th e implication is th at the systems engineer m ust 
address how the C2 Conste llatio n piece parts serve the Air Force C2 Ente rprise in addition to how 
they serve the C2 Cons tellation.  At the highest level17 in this e xample, the view m ust be that the 
Air Fo rce C2 Ente rprise d evelops A ir Force  Net Centric cap abilities to s erve the higher goal of 
providing net-centric C2 for the Joint/Coalition C2 Enterprise.  The im plication is  that the system s 
engineer m ust address how the A ir Force C2 Ente rprise pi ece part s serve joint and coalition net-
centric C2 in  addition to h ow they serve the Air Fo rce C2.   
This discussion leads to an operatio nal definition of enterprise view ed from  the perspective of an 
individual (system  engineer  or other participant) or team in the enterpris e.  It aim s to answer the 
question, “w hat is m y (our) enterpris e?”  
The en terprise is the set of interdependent elem ents (sys tems and resources) that a pa rticipating 
actor o r actors eith er con trol18 or influence.19  The rem ainder of th e elem ents con stitutes the 
enterp rise en vironm ent.20  This is dep icted in Figure 2-3.   
 
                                                 
15 Synthesis is the ab ility to  identify th e whole of wh ich a syste m is a p art, ex plain th e behavior or properties of 
the who le, an d disaggregate the wh ole to identify th e role or fu nction of the system in the wh ole.  Ackoff, R., 
Systems Th inking and its Ra dical Imp lications fo r Mana gement.  IMS Lectu re/Boston , 15 Febr uary 2005.   
16 Wing level at the USAF Electron ic System s Center. 
17 Electronic Sys tems Center Comman d level. 
18 To control means that an action we  can choose t o take  is necessar y and sufficien t to pr oduce an ou tcome. 
19 To influenc e means that a n action we ca n choose  to ta ke is necessa ry but not sufficient to produce a n 
outcome; our a ction is a co-producer of an outcome. 
20 Gharajedaghi, J., Systems Thinking:  Ma nagin g Chaos and Complexity .  Boston, MA:  B utterwo rth 
Heinemann, 1999, p. 31.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2-3
Cont rolled
Element s Influenced
Elements 
 Uncont rolled
Elements 
 
Environment
Enterprise 
System 
(or System o f Systems)
 
 
Figure 2-3.  Operational De finitio n of Enterprise 
 
Note that this definiti on of enterprise and its boundary are virtua l constructs that depend on the 
make-up, authority, and roles of th e participating actors in a com munity of interest.  For exam ple, 
the prog ram team  of a system  managed by ESC m ay have virtual control of most  engineering 
decisions being m ade on the system ’s day-to-day developm ent activities .  If the sy stem is requ ired 
to be com pliant w ith standards developed by the Defense Inform ation System s Agency, the 
program  team  may have representa tion on the standards t eam but that rep resentation is one voice 
of many and so the standard is a program  elem ent or variable that  the program  team  can influence 
but not control.  The Fe deral Acquisition Regu lation req uirements, wh ich apply to v irtually all 
governm ent acquisitions, ar e elem ents or variable s that apply to our ex ample program  but since 
they are b eyond th e control of th e team , they are part of the program ’s environm ent.   
The im plication and view being advo cated her e is that all a ctors or team s in an en terprise se tting 
should know  “their” enterprise a nd be aware of which enterprise elem ents or variables they 
control and which they in fluence.  E nvironm ental elem ents or  factors cannot be controlled or 
influenced.  But th e individual or project team may very w ell need to be aw are of and understand 
implications of environm ental factors.21
We will r eturn to th is con trolled-influenced-uncontrolled f ramework in Se ction 5 whe re the 
discussion focuses on approaches to shaping, im proving, or increasing the value of outcom es for 
the ever increas ing n umber of enterp rise elem ents that can be influenced  but not cont rolled.   
                                                 
21 A sim ple but c lear exam ple of the  need to unde rstand  the uncontrolled ele ments of an environm ent can be 
seen by considering an individual standing on a railroad track with a locomotive bea ring down on him.  While 
he m ay not be able to stop the train, the individual can and should get off the track.   
 2-4
3 Moving fr om Traditional Systems Engineering to 
Enterprise Engineering 
Systems engineering  can be def ined as  a process that integrates multiple d isciplines to d efine and 
transform  requirem ents into a sy stem while involving environmental,  economic, political, and 
social aspects.  Trad itional systems engineering (T SE) is a term  used to describe engineering of 
sub-system s, system s and system s-of-system s.   
TSE is a s equential, iterative de velopm ent process whose goal is  to produce products, m any of 
which are of unpre cedented technical complication and sophisticati on.  T he INCOSE (ANSI/EIA 
632) Systems Engineering m odel, depi cted in F igure 3-1, is a w idely recognized re presentation of 
TSE.    
 
 
Figure 3-1.  INCOSE (ANSI/EIA 632) Systems Engineering Model 
 
An im plicit assum ption of this TSE m odel is that all relevant factors are largely under the control 
of or can be well understood an d accounted for by the engine ering organization, the system  
engineer, or the program  manager.  The culture and processes in a TSE organization norm ally 
reflect this assum ption.   
 3-1
There are fun damental differences in an  enterp rise.  While som e factors m ay continue to be well 
understood by or rem ain under the control of the system  engineer or program  manager, others are 
not.  B ecause enterprises freq uently embrace diverse agenci es, sponsors an d operational 
comm unitie s, there is incr eased em phasis on wor king ac ross and bridging organiza tiona l cultu res, 
agendas, and socio-political-econom ic differences.  Ente rprises exhibit attri butes of a com plex 
system.  As a r esult there arise qu estions of how to  deal with en terpris e processes that approxim ate 
natural evolution and , in som e cases, how to deliberately m imic, encou rage, faci litate and c hannel 
them  in constructive directions.  Adject ives t hat are used to d escribe sy stem engineering and other 
process es in an en terprise expand to  include:  evolutionary, emergent, adaptive, self -organizing, 
competitive a nd coop erative.   
For m any, even m ost system s engineer s the reality of their existence is that they inhabit and m ust 
perform  well in two differe nt system  engineering environm ents at  the sam e time:  a local, program  
office en vironment in wh ich the cultu re, norms, expectations and rewards may be more influenced 
by a TSE culture an d an enterpris e engineering (EE ) culture in wh ich the focus is on enab ling th e 
broad er enterprise, in some cases  even at the exp ense of th e smaller sy stem.   
Every system  engineer m ust brin g enterprise perspectives, beha viors, skills and com petencies22 to 
their activitie s whethe r they are ex ecuted at th e sub-system, system , system -of-sys tems or 
enterp rise scale.  In that s ense, every system engineer operating in or working  on an en terprise 
must cons ider them selves as an  enterprise en gineer, who is required to  perform  system s thinking 
for th e enterprise.23
 
                                                 
22 A behavior is a specific action.  A skill is an ab ility to  perform a co mplex collectio n of actio ns with ease, 
precision  and adaptability to  changing conditions.  Knowledge is a body of understood information possessed 
by an ind ividual wh ich is in acco rd with estab lished fact.  A competency  is a cluster of job-related behaviors, 
skills and knowledge that affects a m ajor part of one’s role or re sponsibility; corre lates with success; c an be 
measured agai nst acce pted st anda rds (that relate to succe ss); and ca n be improve d via trai ning and developm ent.    
(Adapted from S.  Parry, The Quest  for C ompetencies .) 
23 Thus a n Enterprise Enginee r is a system  engineer who bring s an enterprise p erspective t o his or her activities.  
The Enterprise Eng ineer may work on problems at an y scale of the  enterprise:  sub-system , system , SoS or 
Enterprise.  The in dividual who does no t (or is no t required to ) bring  an enterp rise p erspective to his or her 
activ ities is termed  a subsystem  engineer; SoS eng ineer, enterprise system  engineer, etc.  (from a discussio n 
with R.   Swarz, The MITRE  Corporation). 
 3-2
4 Modes of Thought 
The purpose of this Sect ion is to in troduce conc epts which ar e fundam ental to a discussion of the 
emerging views on the new system s thinking in the following Sections. 
4.1 Analysis 
Give a child an object sh e has never seen before an d just leave it with he r.  It can be a radio, a 
clock or a toy.  If she wa nts to d etermine wh at it is (and she usually does), what is th e first thing  
she do es?  She takes it ap art.  Her second step is to determ ine w hat each part doe s, and the  third 
step is to assem ble her knowledge of the parts into knowledge of the whol e.  This three step 
process is analysis.24  
This exam ple m otivates  a more form al definition of analysis  as the ab ility to decom pose an en tity 
into determ inistic com ponents, explain  each  com ponent sep arately, and agg regate the componen t 
behaviors to explain the w hole.25   
Analysis  results in know ledge of an entity:  it re veals internal stru cture.  If the entity is a system  
then analysis  answers the question, “how does the s ystem work?”  For ex ample, to k now h ow an 
autom obile works, you analyze it:  that is, you take it apart and determine wh at each part d oes.  
This is ess ential to im porta nt activities like repairin g autom obiles or diag nosing and repairing 
problem s of other, m ore compl icated systems.   
Analysis , as one of our earliest and m ost natural m odes of thought, is so fundam ental to hum an 
thinking that it has alm ost beco me synonym ous with it.  But is analysis  the only m ode of thought 
required to answer im portant  questions about a system ? 
That th e answer to this q uestion is “n o” can be  seen by considering the autom obile, again.  The 
autom obile was originally designed  for six passengers.  W hy?  Take apart as m any autom obiles as 
you like and no am ount of  analysis w ill lead to an understanding of the six pass enger capacity.  
Why is it not seven, fifteen, or tw elve?  The answer  is that the autom obile was designed for the 
                                                 
24 Ackoff, R., From Mec hanistic to Social Systemic Thinking.  System Thinking in Action Confere nce, 
November 1993.  This is a classical definition of systems analysis and a very sim ple one at that.  New  modes of 
analysis are e merging.  The forces at work in this developmen t are m any.  Part of it comes fro m the evolution to 
net-ce ntric syst ems in which one ca n neither state, a pri ori, the ext ent of a system nor decompose i t into 
deterministic p arts wh ich p erform specific or guaranteed roles or functions.  Yet t he need t o perform  analysis 
continues, unabated.  Additionally, th e view of system s and enterprises as so cio-cultural entities sug gests th at 
analysis should include s ocial or human dimensions, not just tech nical ones.  Th is im plies th at syste ms analysis 
may h ave important similarit ies with  (and much to learn from) field s as diverse as in tellig ence an alysis, m edical 
analysis, stoc k market analysi s, and weat her forecasting.  Lastly, the role of conce ptual framework, limits in 
cognition, and  biases in hu man decision -making are i ncreasingly being reco gnized as forces which are shap ing 
how we view an d do system s analysis: it is no t just abo ut the data, it is also  about how we, as humans, perceiv e 
the data.  It is not the intent of this report to address these new a nd em erging as pects of s ystems analysis, whic h 
would require a paper every bit as lo ng as th is one. 
25 Ackoff, R., Systems T hinking and its Radical Implications for Management.  IMS  Lecture /Boston,  
15 February 2005.   
 4-1
average Am erican fam ily size, wh ich was 5.6 at the tim e.  This exam ple is an illustration of 
synthetic thinking.  Every MITRE syst ems engineer who has defi ned a system  perform ance 
specification  against mission or operational requirem ents has engaged in synt hetic thinking.   
4.2 Synthesis 
Synthesis  is the m ode of thought that re sults in the understanding of an entity :  i.e., an appreciation 
of the role or function an entity  plays in the larger system  of which it is a pa rt.  Just  as analysis  
answe rs the “ what is it?” question about an entity, synthesis  answers th e “why is it wh at it is ?” 
question.   
Synthesis  is the ability to iden tify the w hole of which a system  is a part, explain the behavior or 
properties of the whole and disaggregate the whole to identify the role or f unction of the system  in 
the who le.26   
If you are attem pting to understand a college synthetically the first st ep is to identify the larger 
system  of which the college is a part, e. g., a state higher education syst em.  The second step is to 
explain the containing system  (e.g., the state higher educational system  delivers high quality 
educational program s, available to all its citizens, w ith an em phasis on disciplines im portant to the 
state’s eco nomy).  The th ird step is to disaggregate the whol e to identify the role  or function in the 
system  of which it is a part  (e.g., the state’s econom y is based on ag riculture, mining, and 
information techno logies which ar e reflected in the state higher educat ion system  organization 
structure and  emphasis.   The college in  question has a focus on aca demic disciplines and 
technologies re lated to m ining.).  T aken together, this synthetic view expl ains why t he state has a 
mining college and provides a basis for asking and answering “what if ?” questions about the 
colleg e, lik e:  what if  the state’s economy shifted away from  mining (or m oved m ore tow ards it)?   
If we had attem pted to analyze  the co llege, we would have decom posed the co llege into particular 
departm ents which consist of faculty who educate students to earn certai n degrees in specific 
majors, and so on, down to a level of sufficient granularity to an swer the question at hand.   
Systems th inking requires knowledge and understanding - both an alysis and synthesis – 
represented in th e sam e view.  That is precisely the point of the AEW &C/C2 Constellation 
exam ple in S ection  2.  Th e ability to com bine analyt ic and synthetic perspectiv es in o ne view is an 
enabler of alignm ent of purposes, which is so im portant to successful engineering in nested or 
hierarch ical enterp rises.  It al lows the s ystems engin eer to ask  purposeful questio ns and trace the 
implications of potential answer s across the enterprise.  W ould a chang e in perform ance at the 
subsy stem level re sult in a  chang e at the enterprise level?   If so, how, a nd is it im portant?  H ow 
would a new enterprise le vel need be m et?   
 
                                                 
26 Ackoff, R., Systems T hinking and its Radical Implications for Management.  IMS  Lecture /Boston, 
15 February 2005. 
 4-2
There is an other reason why synthesis is such an im portant systems t hinking concept.  It expands 
the solution s pace of a p roblem in a w ay that can m ake intractable problem s solvable.  The 
following exam ple illustrates how.   
Example:  In the early 20th centu ry the  City of Chicago ran a la rge trolley ca r system.  Th e 
General Manager (GM)  of the tr olley system had a goal to improve its pe rformance and 
efficiency.  T rolley ca rs were run by tw o operators:  a driver and  a conductor.  The driver was 
responsible for maintaini ng the trolley’s schedule:   i.e., arriving and de parting the route stops 
on time.  The conductor w as responsible fo r collecting fares and a ssuring that passengers 
paid the correct fare a nd departed at the right stop (fares were based on geographical zones) .  
Both driver and conductor were paid fixed hourly  salaries.   
The GM reasoned that if the ope rators’ salary structure were changed to a lower hourly base 
rate plus a performance-indexe d rate this would motivate op erator performance improvem ent 
which wou ld tran slate into impro ved o verall trolley system performance and efficiency.  This 
was done.  T he performance-indexe d part of the drivers’ salary was tied to on-time schedule 
performance and that of the conductor to  assuring fare equity.   
But this change immediately c aused a conflict.  Th e driver wa s motivated to depart a stop 
quickly (to stay on schedule) while the conductor was motivated to  more carefully (and, hence, 
more slowly) issue tickets, collect fares, and check that departing passengers  had not gone 
beyond the zone for which they paid ( inspectors, m asquerading as  ordinary passengers, 
evaluated driver and conducto r performance) .  The relati onship between drivers and 
conductors became antagonistic with the result that  overall trolley system performance 
actually decreased.  The problem, of course , was  that the new performanc e system had 
created an i nherent conflict between the oper ators.   
Many solutions were trie d.  They all focused on improving the efficiency of one or the other of 
the trolley operators’ job as a mechanism for deconfliction.  For example, different internal 
configurations of the trolley wer e tried in an  attemp t to reduce the time it too k to exe cute 
conductor responsibil ities.  Nothing w orked and the conflict  continued. 
A consultant was finally brought in.  T he prob lem was explained to him in great detail, 
including all the options that ha d been considered for improving operator efficiency.  The first 
question the consultant asked was,  “how many trolleys are in the system?”  T he GM thought 
this was a curious and not particu larly relevant questio n given that the prob lem was a conflict 
between two operators on a tr olley but he answ ered, “1,250.”  The consultant wrote that 
down and asked, “how many troll ey stops are in the system?”  The GM answered, “ 850” and 
went on to express his disappoint ment in this line of obviously irreleva nt questioning.  T he 
consultant wrote down 850, loo ked up at the G M and said, “I have a solution to your 
problem.  There are more c onductors than stops.  T ake the conductors off the trolleys, 
position them at the stops wher e they can co llect fa res from cu stomers lining up at the stop 
 4-3
before the trolley arrive s and check fare zones from passenger s after they exit the trolley.  In 
this way you will comp letely sepa rate the contentious timelines of the two ope rators.” 27   
The consultant had used a counte rintuitive principle to solve the trolley problem .  When fa ced 
with an apparently intr actable problem the usual response is to m ake it smaller, contain, or 
constrain it.  The  consultant in this exam ple was going down a lin e that app eared to m ake the 
problem space larg er in seem ingly irrelevant ways.  But,  in fact, he was m aking the solution space 
larger by viewing the problem  in the context of its c ontaining whole.  Th is is a f orm of synthesis .   
This exam ple also touches on a nd leads into the next topic, multidimensionality . 
4.3 Multidim ensionality28 
Much of  traditional systems thinking has been dom inated by a view that op posing tendencies are 
to be treated as a duality in a zero-sum gam e:  order/ complexity; chang e/stability , and so on.  
These pairs are v iewed in a way th at a gain for one inva riably results in a lo ss for the other.   
In this view, opposing tendencies ar e formulated as either m utually exclusive, discrete choices or 
a continuum .  In the former, de picted on the left in Figure 4-1, choice s are expressed as 
dichotom ies, X or ~ X, which is an exclusive  or relationship:  a win/lose situation in which the 
loser, usually declared  “incorrect” is elim inated.  In the latt er, depicted on the  right in Figure 4-1, 
opposing tendencies are treated as interm ediate sh ades of grey between polar opposites of black 
and white.  R esolution is achiev ed by com promise which norm ally results in an unstable m ix of 
elements of the two extrem es.  The instability com es from  the co nstant struggle between groups 
which each continue to see differe nt “clear and pr esent” urgencies that com e from their view of 
reality.  Opp osing tende ncies need not be co nstrained to pa irs as the familiar acqu isition tr ade-
space trio of cost, schedule, an d capabilities dem onstrates.   
 
 
 
X NO T X
Win/Lose Black W hite
Compromise  OR  
                                                 
 
Figure 4-1.  Traditional View  of Rela tionship Betw een O pposing Tendencies29
 
27 Ackoff, R., Systems T hinking and its Radical Implications for Management.  IMS  Lecture /Boston, 
15 February 2005. 
28 Gharajedaghi, J. Sy stems Thi nking: Managing Chaos and Complexity. Boston: Butterworth Heinemann, 
1999, pp. 38–43; 67–71. 
29 Ibid., p.38. 
 4-4
 
 
The prin ciple of multid imensionality holds tha t seem ingly opposing tendencies not only coexist, 
overlap and, hence, in teract, but they also form a com plementary30 relationship.  More form ally, 
multidim ensionality31 is the ability to see  com plementary relations in opposi ng tendencies and to 
create feasible wholes with  seem ingly unfeasible parts.32   
This d efinition changes the ch aracteri zation of opposing tendencies from  an or to an and 
relationship, and result s in a view of them  as being sepa rate, mutually in terdependent dim ensions 
that can interact and be integr ated into a new way of thinki ng.  It expands the duality-based 
solution space from  choices betw een win, lose, or unstable compro mise to one in which opposing 
tendencies can both (or all) “win.”    A generic represen tation of this is dep icted in F igure 4-2.  
This perspective provides the opportunity to interpre t opposing tendenc ies in a new relationship 
with a logic of its own.  T his is particularly  relevant  to the enterpri se-as-social-system  problem  
space:  in  social sy stems, the form ulation of problem s into the dichotom y of X or not X  rarely 
appears to be an im portant solution approach.33
 
 
Tendenc y B Lose-Wi n
Lose-Lose Wi n-Lose 
Low High Low High 
Tendenc y A Win-Wi n 
 
Figure 4-2.  Complementary View  of Rela tionship Betw een Opposing Tendencies34
 
                                                 
30 A complement is th at wh ich fills o ut or co mpletes a whole.   
31 Dimension  may refe r to eithe r mathematically qua ntifiable varia bles or as pects or facets of a system .   
32 Gharajedaghi, J., Systems Thinking:  Ma nagin g Chaos and Complexity .  Boston:  Butterworth Hei neman n, 
1999, p. 38. 
33 Churc hman, C.  West.  The Systems Approach and Its Enemies.  New York, N Y:  Ba sic Books,  1979. 
34 Op. Cit., Gharajedaghi, p. 3 9. 
 4-5
Figure 4 -3 shows an exam ple co mplementary re lationship between concern for stability and 
concern for change.  The interact ions of high and low concerns in  each of the dim ensions produce 
completely different m odes of behavior.35   
 
Concern f or
Change
Concern f or StabilityMature Radical
Anarch y Conserv ative
Low HighLowHigh
Concern f or
Change
Concern f or StabilityMature Radical
Anarch y Conserv ative
Low HighLowHigh
Concern f or StabilityMature Radical
Anarch y Conserv ative
Low HighLowHigh
 
 
Figure 4-3.  Interaction s Produ ce Different Modes of Behavior36
 
Figure 4-4 shows another com plementary relationship and uses it to  differentiate am ong styles of 
managem ent based on the m anager’s concern fo r production and concern for people.  A lthough 
the upper left and up per right quadrants both s how a high concern for peopl e, the expressions of 
that concern are quite diff erent.  The upper lef t quadrant represents a pa ternalistic, pop ulist leader 
whose concern for people is basi cally a concern for thei r weakness which is often expressed as a 
protective nature towards them .  The upper right quadra nt repres ents a lead er whose concern for 
people stem s from  a respect for thei r ability which is  directed at assisting th em to ach ieve their on -
the-job potential.  Sim ilarly, Fi gure 4-5 portrays the results of a study of factors conducive to 
innovation.37   
                                                 
35 The boundary between high and low levels of a tendency is the point at which the behavior of an aspect of the 
syste m changes qualitativ ely.  Th is may be thought of as an in flection  point or phase ch ange.  For example, if 
an individual has $10 0 a week to  spend on transportation she m ay own an economy car.  At $200 per week , she 
may own  a luxury sedan and with $300 a week she may have a high-end sports car.  But if she has $10,000 a 
week  to spend on transportation she may not own a car at all but get her personal transportation by  helicopter or 
chauffe ured lim ousine.  For an expanded di scussion  see Gh arajedaghi, pp. 40–41.   
36 Ibid., p. 41. 
37 Gordon, G., et. al., A Con tingen cy Mod el for the Design  of Prob lem Solving Resea rch program, Millb ank 
Memorial Fund  Quarterly (19 74):  184-220.   
 4-6
 
Conce rn for 
PeopleConcern st ems 
from  respect for 
people’s ability  
& indi vidualityPaternali stic 
conce rn for 
people’s 
weakness
Little 
conce rn for 
people or 
productio nConcern for 
productio n; 
views people as 
resourc e to 
enable it
Low HighLowHigh
Concern for ProductionConce rn for 
PeopleConcern st ems 
from  respect for 
people’s ability  
& indi vidualityPaternali stic 
conce rn for 
people’s 
weakness
Little 
conce rn for 
people or 
productio nConcern for 
productio n; 
views people as 
resourc e to 
enable it
Low HighLowHigh
Concern for Production 
Figure 4-4.  Management Style38
 
 
Ability to fi nd
simil arities
among ob jects
which seem to
be differentINNOVATORSPROBLEM  
SOLVER S
IMITATORS
DOE RSPROBLEM
FORMUL ATORS
Low HighLowHigh
Ability to fin d similari ties among 
objects which seem to be simila rAbility to fi nd
simil arities
among ob jects
which seem to
be differentINNOVATORSPROBLEM  
SOLVER S
IMITATORS
DOE RSPROBLEM
FORMUL ATORS
Low HighLowHigh
Ability to fin d similari ties among 
objects which seem to be simila rINNOVATORSPROBLEM  
SOLVER S
IMITATORS
DOE RSPROBLEM
FORMUL ATORS
Low HighLowHigh
Ability to fin d similari ties among 
objects which seem to be simila r 
Figure 4-5.  Innovative Abilities39
 
                                                 
38 Op. cit., Gharajedaghi, p. 4 2. 
39 Ibid., p. 43. 
 4-7
Example:  Westville (f ictitious name)  is a suburb of a large New England city.  The 
community has had a long history of quality in  its educational system .  The reputation is 
justified.  By any meas ure – results in academic contests, SAT scores, or placement in the 
most competitive u niversities  – Westville consistently outp erformed its mo re affluent 
neighboring towns and even most nearby  prestigious priv ate schools.   
The quality education We stville schools provide was a consequence of se veral factors:  strong 
paren tal invo lvement; the percentage o f local taxes that a re devoted to  the schools; and the 
effectiveness of school system adm inistrators in applyin g monies to programs  of excellence.   
Life in Westville revol ved around the children and sc hools so much so that  after their children 
graduated “empty nesters” in large numbers would migrate out  of town in search of 
communities better aligned with their new interests.  They were  replaced by younger fam ilies 
eager to take advantage of Westville’s quality schools.   
But som ething changed in  the early 1990s.  Adults whose children had gradu ated from the 
schoo l system incr easingly viewed  Westville as th eir retirement community of choice.  T hese 
active seniors began look ing to the town for services and facili ties that served their needs.   
At the same time, education cost s began rising faster than the economy.  Fam ilies with school 
age children advocated additiona l taxes to ma intain the quality o f education while retirees, 
particularly those on fixed incomes, became appre hensive of their ability  to afford living in 
“their” town.  Over time, a conflict em erged and grew as a consequence of  the shifting 
demographics of the town.  Fa milies with school-aged chil dren and empty nesters had 
different priorities.  Town  meetings became heated.   
Town members framed the discus sion as a contention concer ning the amount and distribution 
of financial resources.  The “s olution” took the form  of an unstable compromise (referen ce 
Figure 4-1)  between opposing fact ions representing “quality sch ools” and “senior livability.”  
The school administration woul d find and implement incremental efficiencies year after year 
until it became clear to a majori ty of the town that additional m onies were needed for schools 
at which p oint the town v oted an inc rease in tax es, to the g reat constern ation of the seniors.  
Seniors got a few program s aimed at them but th ey were a lways judg ed “too little, too late.” 
Both sides w ere unhapp y most of the time. 
A small num ber of citizens fo rmed a group aim ed at asking the question, “what would a 
solution look  like tha t maintained sch ool qua lity and improved senior livability?”  The 
question suggested an interd ependence between w hat had been view ed as tw o opposing 
tendencies and opened up new solution possibilities beyond w in, lose, or compromise.   
In discussing this qu estion it became clear that many  empty nesters and  retirees:   
• came from the k nowledge industry, 
• understood the value of education, 
• wanted to give something back to their community, and 
 4-8
• had a “pipe dream” of contributin g to education in some way. 
An idea emerged out of  the group for a program  in which empty nest ers and retirees could 
become teacher assistants or even teachers (if certified or will ing to undergo certifica tion).  
Individuals in the progra m could participate as vo lunteers (no remunerati on), for a tax credit 
(to be applied against local taxe s) or be paid a small salary .  Many partici pated.  Most 
volunteer ed, some took a  tax cr edit, and a few opted fo r the salary.   
The program  became popular and sp read to other Westville tow n services (library, recreation 
center, after sc hool sports and other activities) .  The cost sa vings reduced educational and 
other town expenses.  Tax increase requests  reduced in frequency and magnitude.  Seniors 
became more integrated in the commu nity.  Th ey felt less of a need for separate senior 
programs and so those demands de creased.  What remained of them was adequately met by a 
portion of the town’s  cost savings.   
Westville su cceed ed in tra nsforming a win, lose , compromise s ituation to on e in wh ich th e 
vast majority of citizens w ere happy.  It did so by reframi ng an “ or” situation into an “ and” 
one using the principle of  multidim ensionality.   
We will r eturn to m ultidimensionality  in Se ction  5 where it will be us ed with the con trolled-
influenced-uncontrolled f ramework to illum inate th e com plementary relationship between 
innovation (or differentia tion) and integration, an d how com plexity can be harnessed through 
thoughtful interventi on in processes that are beyon d our direct control.   
4.4 Interdependence40 
Classical system s thinking has fo cused on analysis and analysis has focused on problem s in which 
the variables are independent or may reasonably be assum ed to be so.  W hen the variables are, 
indeed, independent this is a powerful f ramework si nce it a llows  the sys tems engineer to logically 
decom pose a sys tem into its variables and exam ine the respo nse of the sys tem to chang es in each 
variable, one at a tim e.    
A comm on pitf all is not recognizing that a system  may contain slac k between its variables and it 
is the slack which allows the analyst to treat the variables as though they are independent but only 
in a number of circumstances  or up to a point.  The perform ance of the va riables in a sys tem can 
be im proved until the slack am ong them  is used  up at which point the variables becom e 
interdependent and im provem ent in  one com es only at the exp ense of others.  The sequen ce in 
Figur e 4-6 illustra tes this idea.  In (a ) the three circles represe nt three variables whose 
interdependence is n ot evident, as  suggested by the wavy lines which join the m.  (Pictu ring this 
sequence as three chil dren tied at the wa ist by ropes m ay help in the vi sualization.).  In (b) the top 
circle m oves but the slack  is not yet used up and so the inte rdependence am ong the circles is still 
not evid ent.  In ( c) the top circle has m oved sufficiently so no slack remains between it and  the 
other two circles.  The interd epend ence between  the top circle  and the other two becom es clear.  
                                                 
40 Ibid., pp. 13–16 . 
 4-9
Note tha t the slack b etween the bottom two c ircles is not used up and so interdepend ence between 
them  is not yet apparent.   
 
 
(a) (b) (c)
 
 
Figure 4-6.  Slack in a System  May Appear as Independence 
 
Enterprises or other large, complex organizations m ay run into interdependenc e as an iss ue when 
engaged in quality or other sy stem-wide im provem ent cam paigns.  In th ese situations  it is 
custom ary to gauge im provem ent as perform ance increases in m ultiple variables (shorter 
developm ent tim e, better cost containm ent, incr eased custom er satisfac tion, reduction in product 
defects, im proved safety, etc.).  Often, these campaigns reach a pl ateau, stall in their progress, or 
even reg ress as m easured by th e variables of interest.  When this happens it is usua l to thin k that 
the organization needs to be re-e nergized in th e improvem ent cam paign a nd, of course, this m ay 
be the case.  However, pl ateauing m ay be a sym ptom that the ente rprise o r system – in its curren t 
form – has reached its potential.  It has used up all its slack.  Fu rther p rogress can only com e from  
a redesign of the organization or ope ration of the enterp rise or system. 
Example:  T he trolley example in  Section 4.2 is an illustration of  a situation in which  further 
progress required a redesign of the system.  A s long as the design  of the overall trolley system 
kept the driver and conductor on the trolley, it created an in terdependence between driver 
performance and conductor perfor mance that traded improvements  in one at the expense of 
the other.  Moving the conducto r from the trolley was – in essence – a rede sign of the system 
that provided additional slack betwee n the two performance variables. 
 4-10
5 A Framework for  Harnessing Complexity 
Section 2 introduced an op erational definition of en terprise based on the notion that the ele ments 
or variables in our world could be  partitioned into those we control, those we influence, and those 
beyond our control.  A co nsequence of  MITRE and its sponsors  evolving towards an enterprise 
model is that each of us, as part icipating actors in our enterprise, are lo sing th e ability to control 
many elem ents wh ile at the sam e time we are g aining in our potential to influence m any others.  
System s eng ineering , therefore, is becom ing m ore and m ore about the ability  to inf luence in our 
increasingly com plex environm ent. 
5.1 A Systems Vie w of Development41 
Developm ent42 is a purposeful transfor mation towards higher leve ls of differentiation and 
integ ration at the same time.  Dev elopment is an  evolutionary process by  which  a social sys tem 
(e.g., individual, team , communit y, enterp rise) increases its ab ility or value (as gauged by 
perform ance, effectiven ess, impact, influence, prof itability, etc.).  Differentiation  refers to 
deviations am ong entities that  are apparently sim ilar and integration  refers to t he similarities 
among things that are apparently different.  The form er em phasizes  tendencies toward increased 
complexity, variety and autonom y while the latter tends  toward increased order, uniform ity, 
conform ity, and collectivity.   
Note the sim ilarity in concepts and term inology used in the discus sion of Figure 4-5.  The basic 
idea is the sam e:  the seem ingly opposite tendencies of different iation and integration com plement 
each other to create innovation  which is both a destination (in Fi gure 4-5 ) and a journey or process 
(in Figure 5-1). 
                                                 
41 Gharajedaghi, J., Systems Thinking:  Ma nagin g Chaos and Complexity .  Boston, MA:  B utterwo rth 
Heinemann, 1999.   
42 This development model is quite gene ral and can be applied to individuals, teams (large or small), systems, 
and enterprises as defined in Sectio n 2.  Our fo cus will generally b e on team s, syst ems, and enterprises which 
will b e generically referred to as “o rganizations.”  The other term s will b e used where app ropriate.   
 5-1
Differen tiationIntegration
Unorganized
&
ComplexIntegrated
&
Unchanging
21Integrated
&
Complex
Unorganized
&
Unchanging3
Differen tiationIntegration
Unorganized
&
ComplexIntegrated
&
Unchanging
21Integrated
&
Complex
Unorganized
&
Unchanging3
 
Figure 5-1.  A Systems View  of De velopment 
 
The d iscussion th at follows in the  next several paragraphs will st ep through F igure 5-1 using an 
enterp rise as an ex ample, but it s hould be kept in m ind that this developm ental model is a pplicab le 
to individuals and team s as well as enterprises.    
An enterprise in the lower left  quadrant of Figure 5-1 is st atic and unorganize d.  Change is 
infrequent or non-existent and the piece-parts that are there are u norganized into any sem blance of 
a coherent whole.  Movem ent or evolution is genera lly possible, of cour se, so the question 
becom es one of direction.   
One evo lutionary pa th is to or ganize all the elem ents and pro cesses that currently exist in th e 
enterp rise, that is, in tegrate straight up to the u pper left quadrant, as indi cated by arrow 1 in Figure 
5-1.  T he result is organized si mplicity:  a highly in tegrated organization which knows how to do 
things v ery well in es sentially one way.  Change in  the way things are done is difficult to effect .  
The organization is rigid and infl exible in how it responds to pr oblem s, opportunit ies, and other 
chang es in its env ironm ent.   
Another possibility for evolution is towards unor ganized com plexity, as indicated by arrow 2.  
This is an organization that pr oliferates many ideas for accomp lishing activities or developing 
products (dif ferentiation) but ne ver integrates them  into a c oherent process or product.  
Frequ ently, there is an  elem ent of  innovation in this di fferentiation but what keeps it from  being 
true innovation is that the good ideas never ge t realized.  E xamples of unorganized com plexity are 
some of the early internet inve ntors who produced num erous el egant and novel approaches to 
 5-2
solving in ternet technology pro blems but never put them  together  into a coherent, f inancially 
profitable busine ss pack age.   
The las t possibility  for evolution is towards in tegrated com plexity, as indicated by arrow 3.  This 
is a m ovem ent towar ds complexity  and order at th e sam e time.  This is an organization that 
proliferates m any new ideas abou t its processes, products, and solution approaches and then 
selec ts and in tegrates the best of them  into subs equent versions or enti rely new inca rnations.  
Some organizations develop elabor ate and detailed 10-year  plans and th en ex ecute to that plan .  
An integrated, com plex organiza tion is not like that:  instea d, it “reinvents itself” through 
continual dif ferentiation and in tegration to h igher levels of value a nd perform ance.  T his 
“continuous reinvention” prov ides adaptability to e nvironm ental changes.   
5.2 A Systems View  of Development – Examples 
Com plex entities like individual s, team s, or enterprises do no t develop in stra ight lin es, as 
suggested by the arrows in Fi gure 5-1; nor are sp ecific developmental outcomes necessarily 
guaranteed when an individual, team or enterprise em barks on a developm ental program .  So, 
how do com plex entities develop?   The following exam ples m otivate a ge neral developm ental 
framework which w ill be elaborated in  the rem ainder of this section.   
Example:  John is a capable pe rformer who wanted to improve his value and impact at work.  
In collaboration with hi s supervisor and mentor John de cided to achieve his goal by 
improving his communicatio n skills, technica l currency, and visibility w ithin his organization.   
John looked into several oppor tunities for improving his co mmunication skills including a 
variety of courses on effective wr iting and effective brie fing preparation.  He  enrolled in one 
of each.  John also joined  a debating club.  H e soon real ized that he communicated 
adequately in prepared  situations and so he dropped  the courses and increased his 
involvement in the debating cl ub.  John integrated his debating cl ub experiences into his on-
the-job impromptu and extemp oraneous discussions.   
John explored different w ays of increasing his technica l currency:  evening classes at a local 
university; e-Learning; and in- house courses at his place of  employment.  His frequent 
busin ess travel mad e the even ing class schedule untenable.  The e-Lea rning environmen t was 
too unstructured for John.  The in-house courses provid ed the right balance of flexibility for 
his travel schedule and st ructure, so John f ocused on t hat appr oach to improve his technical 
currency.   
John was known and well regarded in his business unit.  But it was a small and established 
part of the company’s overall op erations.  John diversified his individual work portfolio so 
that he and his work became mo re widely known in the compan y.  He also sought out and 
contributed to initiatives  perceived as vitally im portant to the co mpany’s future.  A s a result, 
John got visibility at higher  organization levels.   
 5-3
Example:  Jane runs an engineering consulting group that is geographic ally divided betw een 
two locations.  One pa rt of the group is colloc ated with the client and th e other is located at a 
facility 400 miles away.   
The client wa s gen erally pleased w ith the con sulting services provided  but began to question 
the contributions of the part of the group t hat was physically separated from them.   
Jane took several actions to remedy this perceptio n.  She began having we ekly teleconference 
meetings that included  the client and group me mbers at both locations.  She made a point of 
having group members away from th e client location lead and brie f activities to the client.  
Jane also rearranged som e of the work so the away locati on had sole staffing and product 
responsibility for it.   
These actions succeeded in c hanging client understanding of the away location staff and 
perception of their valu e to th e exis ting contract.  It also led to an unexpected, positive 
consequence:  the client contra cted w ith Jane’s com pany for a different consulting activity 
based on the abilities a nd experience of the remo te location staff.   
Example:  L inda is the general manager of a large and diverse business  enterprise.  E ach 
division, by itself, has been successful in its niche and each has a reputation for innovating 
within its pro duct area an d market.  T he divisions’ tenden cy, ho wever,  is to innova te 
incrementally in fa irly predictable steps along their separate, vari ous product lines.   
Linda understands the impor tance and value of th is “directional” inno vation but she sees 
enormous potential for transfor mational innovation t hat develops fresh, groundbreaking ideas 
for new products and markets by associating concepts and tech nologies from  one division 
with those from another division.43   
Linda’s vice presidents pa y all the right lip service to  her visio n but they never seem to g et 
around to putting together any crea tive cross-division proposals.   They are not opposed to 
Linda’s idea:  they are each just “ too busy” managing their own successful operations.  
Linda has held focus group sessions and off-site s in an attempt to gene rate some ideas and 
enthusiasm.  She even con sidered a ma jor reorganization to brea k down inter divisional 
barriers and better alig n operations w ith transformational  innovation.  But Linda understands 
that such a reorganizat ion risks undoing the cu rrent organizatio n’s incremental innovation 
ability, which is also  very impor tant to future business.   
Linda decided to leave th e current organizations in place but to add a sma ll but important 
business process.  Approval for fu ll sca le developm ent of a division’s new product now 
requires the usual docum entation and briefings and , in addition, the divisi on is required to 
                                                 
43 In The Medici Effect  (Har vard Business School Press , Boston, MA.  2004) Frans Johansson differentiates 
between two types of innovation – directional and intersectio nal.  Th e former represen ts increm ental 
development and the latter represents tran sformational development which requires the removal of high 
associative bar riers between different cultures in an organization.   
 5-4
arrange and present an agreed , funded, cross-division coll aborative proposal aimed at 
transformational innovation.   
With this sm all change, L inda linked success within a division to  collaboration across 
divisions.  In effect, he r new policy changed the rules of succes s for the divisions and reshaped 
the interaction patte rns of her vice presiden ts and the divisions they lead to place a prem ium 
on collaboration.  L inda cannot predict the exact details of the cross-di visional collaborations 
(nor would she necessarily want  to), but she can assure that  they will happen if the vice 
presidents and their divisions wi sh to remain successfu l.  The strateg y becam e so successful 
that it was copied by other ge neral managers in the company. 
5.3 A General Development Fram ework for Complex Systems 
The three very different exam ples in Section 5.2 all involve the developm ent of a com plex entity 
or system  (individual, team , enterprise).  In e ach example, we can see m ovement towards the 
integ rated co mplexity dep icted in Figure 5-1.  How did it happen ?  Clearly,  each of th e cen tral 
characters in the exam ples intervened in th eir com plex situation s in ways that helped bring them  
to a “future” they were seeking.   
What was th e nature of these in terventions?  The first exam ple concer ned an individual who 
explored a variety of opportunities for developing his comm unication skills and technical 
curren cy before selecting spec ific app roaches that s erved his needs.  Th e seco nd exam ple 
illustrated how a line m anager solved a percep tion problem  concerning pa rt of her team  by 
chang ing th e intera ction  patterns betw een them  and her clie nt.  The last example illu strated a 
general m anager selecting a strategy44 to im prove innovation, which wo rked so well it was copied 
across th e corporation . 
While sim ple, th ese exam ples illu strate the key elements of a guiding developm ental fram ework 
for any com plex adap tive system :  45  variation, interaction and sel ection .  Thes e are interlo cking 
concepts that can generate product ive actions in com plex situations that cannot be controlled but 
can b e influenced (referen ce Figure 2-3).  The fram ework will help us ask and answer the 
question, “w hat in terventions in our com plex system  are likely  to bring us to a future we would 
prefer? ”46  This m oves us from  being passive obser vers in com plex situa tions to activ e 
                                                 
44 A strategy  is th e way an ag ent respo nds to its surroundings and pursues it s goals.  The usage i ncludes 
deliberate cho ice in  the sen se of business strateg y and patterns of respon se that pur sue goals with  little or no 
deliberation .   
45 A complex adaptive system  is a c omplex system (ref.   footnote no.  1) that cont ains agents or populations that 
seek to adapt.  An agent  is en tity th at has the ability to  interact with  its en vironment, including other agents.  It 
can respond to what  happens around it and can do things more or less purposefully.  A population is a grouping 
of entities (e.g ., agents, strateg ies) that have a common attribute, affin ity or bond (e.g., pop ulation  of business 
managers , population of coworkers). 
46 The fram ework provides a  systematic way to a nalyze com plex syste ms that s uggests us eful questions 
and illum inates  prom ising pos sibilities for ac tion a nd it can clarify relationships  among seemingly 
separate issu es.  Analyzing  com plex adaptive syste ms within this or an y other fram ework does not assu re 
the ability to produce or p redict specific  outcom es.  But it c an foste r an increase in val ue, impact or 
 5-5
participants who manage  variation, shape  interactions and make  selections to guide, even 
accelerate47 improvem ent over tim e.   
What do these thre e processes do ?  Variation  produces raw m aterial for adaptati on.48  Interaction 
makes or changes the rules and strateg ies ag ents play by and their inte raction patterns.  Selection  
prom otes adaptation.   
What questions do these processe s help answer?   A variation-in teraction-selection f ramework 
clusters the discuss ion of chang e mechanism s in a com plex system  on three central and connected 
questions:49
• What is the right balan ce between variety and un iformity in  a system? 
• What (or who) should interact with w hat (or who) and when ? 
• What should be m aintained  or proliferated and wh at should be elim inated?  
 
Much of  the intelle ctual content of this variation-interaction-selection fram ework50 com es from  
seminal wo rk51 done by Robert Axelrod a nd Michael Cohen (who, toge ther w ith Arthur Burks 
and John Holland, com prise the orig inal m embers of  the BACH group). 
                                                                                                                                                       
perform ance of the system  over tim e.  It provides a basis for inquiring where leverage points and 
significant trade-offs of a com plex system may occu r and it suggests what kinds of situations may be 
resistan t to po licy in terventions and when small in terventions are lik ely to  have large effects (lik e the 
third ex ample in Section  5.2).   
47 The idea of manipulating a complex system through regimens to accelerate  improvem ent com es from  
discussi ons with and writings of M. L. Kuras (The M ITRE Corporation).   
48 Adaptation  is said to occ ur when a selection proces s lead s to an improvement accord ing to some measure of 
success .   
49 Altho ugh not mentioned explicitl y, the change mechanisms may b e in respo nse to changes in th e 
environment. 
50 Axelrod, Robe rt and Michael  D. C ohen.  Harn essing  Complexity:  Org anizational Implications of a Scientific 
Fron tier.  New Yo rk, NY:  Basic Bo oks, 2000. 
51 The foundation  for th e variatio n-interaction-selec tion framework comes from  three distinct fields:  
evolutionary biology, computer sci ence, and social design.  Evolutionary biology provides in sights into 
how ad aptations co me about through the reprodu ction of successf ul individuals (with their succe ssful 
strateg ies) in populations.  Computer sci ence, particularly evolutionary computation, has fostered an 
engineeri ng approach to adaptation in which one asks how systems can be  designed to be more effect ive 
over time.  The  rapid growth of the Internet (with its distributed and network-mediated co mputing) has 
led com puter s cience int o deeper analyses of what  it takes t o make syste ms of m any agents work 
together and grow.  Social design provides insig hts into people and  their activ ities in  political, econ omic 
and social syste ms.  In  particular, org anizatio n theory provides insights into  how an d why in stitutional 
structure matters and game theory provides insights into how people ch oose strateg ies to maximize th eir 
payoffs  in the prese nce of other people who are attem pting to do t he sam e.   
 
 5-6
 The perspective that is presented in this report is one which overlays Axelrod and Cohen’s 
variation-interacti on-selection construc t onto Gh arajedagh i’s systems view of developm ent, as 
depicted in F igure 5-2.  G harajedagh i prov ides the des tination.  Axelrod a nd Cohen provide 
mechanism s for m oving towards it.  F igure 5-3 is the sam e as Figure 5-2 but with ca llouts tha t 
show the organization of the discussion that follows on variation, interaction and selection.   
 5-7 
Figure 5-2.  A General Developmen t Framework fo r Complex Syste ms Different iationUnorganizedIntegration 
Integrated
& 
Unchanging 
Uncnized
& 
Complex Integrated
& 
Complex 
& 
hanging Unorga
VariationSelec tion      Shaping Interactions 
 
DifferentiationIntegration
Integrated
&
Unchanging
Unorganized
&
Un
 
 5-8changingUnorg
VariationSelection
anized
&
ComplexIntegrated
&
ComplexShaping Interactions
•Proximity and activation
•Physical and conceptual spaces
•Methods of shaping interaction patterns
–External methods
•Barriers to  movement in time and phy sical space
•Barrriersto movement in conceptual space
•Semi-permeable barriers
•Activation in ssequenceor parallel (time)
–Internal methods
•Following an  agent
•Following a si gnal
•Forming boundaries (LALI)
•Separating time scales
•Redistributing stress
•Organizing routines
•Restructuring of physical and conceptual spaces•Altering the frequency of types
–Copying with error
–Internal copying 
mechanisms
–Recombining mechanisms
–Exploration versus 
exploitation
•Extinction
•Defining Success Criteria
•Determining level of selection
–Agents
–Strategies
•Attribution of credit
•Creating new agents or strategies
Figure 5-3.  Organiz ation of Discussion on the General Development Framew ork 
5.4 Variation52 
Variation pro duces  the raw m aterial fo r adaptation .53  Variety is not only desirable to developm ent 
of a com plex adaptive system , it is essential.  And it is essentia l not only in th e popular “survival 
of the fittes t” sens e in which a “best-of -breed ” artifact or agent is iden tified an d selected fro m 
among a set of “also rans” which are then elim inated.  That wh ich is not currently best m ay be a 
critical resou rce for the fu ture of a com plex adaptive sys tem.  For exam ple, w ithout variety, the 
introduction of a new threat, such  as a parasite or virus, can wreak havo c whether in cro ps, 
computers, or other m onocultures.   
But to take advantage of what has already been le arned, som e limits must be placed on the am ount 
of variety or diversity in the system .  Otherw ise, there is th e risk of expe nding resources 
generating options fo r achieving a goal and never actually choosing a nd using one.  These factors 
and trade-offs were at wo rk in the exam ple in Section 5.2 of th e individual w ho ex plored a variety 
of opportunities for developing hi s communication skills and techni cal currency be fore selecting 
specific app roaches that s erved his needs. 
The actions  availab le to sh ape the beh avior of a complex system  often work not just by 
accom modating v ariety; they also  work by actu ally increas ing or decreas ing the variety of agen ts 
in a population (e.g., in ternet standards, produc t designs under co nsideration f or developm ent).  
Variety  turns up repeatedly in com plex systems as a crucial factor in th eir developm ent.  But the 
situation is not always as si mple as saying that hom ogeneit y is bad and variety is good.  
Hom ogeneity can be very useful indee d, as the following exam ple shows.   
Example:  C onsider a C2 Enterp rise built on  a lay ered architecture in which IP is a chosen 
point of convergen ce for all network im plemen tations. 54  The standardization  of IP is a form 
of homogeneity imposed on the enterprise.  Differ entiation is los t at that particul ar level of the 
architecture and innov ation is – if not lo st – seriously affected bec ause the inertia of a w idely 
accepted and adopted sta ndard can only be overco me by the most comp elling reasons.  But 
that same standardizati on enables innovation to flourish above and below the standard and is 
therefore a net gain for the enterprise.   
So, the key question in variation surrounds c hoosing the right balan ce between variety and 
uniform ity.  What are m echan isms for m anaging that balance?  
5.4.1 Altering the Frequency of Types 
There are several basic ways in which populations in a com plex system  can be created m odified, 
or elim inated.  W ithin a give n population we will different iate am ong subpopulations and call 
                                                 
52 Op. cit., Ax elrod and  Cohen, pp. 32–61. 
53 Variation prod uces artifacts  whic h are objects that are  used by age nts (e.g., a system s engi neeri ng process).  
Artifacts can  have important properties (e.g., lo cation  or capabilities).  Artifacts u sually do  not have their own 
purposes or  powers of reproduction.   
54 Electronic Sys tems Center St rategi c Technical Plan (STP ) v 2. 1.   
 5-9
them  types.  A type is a category of artifacts or agents within  the larg er population which share 
some detectable com bination of features.55
5.4.1.1  Copying w ith Error 
In the sim plest cas e copying can  be vie wed as  a primitive rep roduction pro cess.  W hen it 
functions w ithout erro r the result is an increase  in the frequency of one of the populati on types.   
Copying is rarely perfect.  In nature, genetic m utation is a copy ing error that is  an im portant 
source of variety.  It can create new typ es as well as alte r the re lative frequency of existing types.   
There are m any m echanism s in hum an social sy stems that are sim ilar to genetic m utation.  
Process erro r (in sy stems engineeri ng organizations, factor ies, or research la boratories) is one.  
These introduce variation into a system  from sources like th e misunderstanding of a system  
engineering process by a ne w em ployee, or delibera te shortcuts in established processes by an 
individual because of deadline pr essures.  Mos t variants introduced by  mutation are  detrimental.  
There is the occasional sm all im provem ent and th e rare spectacul ar improvement.  An exam ple of 
the latter is the ink jet princi ple which was discover ed as  a result of a research  laboratory 
malfunction .   
Exploring (or expecting) new possibilities via copy ing with error is slow and costly. 
5.4.1.2  Internal Co pying Mechanisms 
Mech anism s that p roduce new typ es or chang es in ty pe freq uency in a targ eted fashion tend to be 
triggered by even ts internal to the sys tem in whic h they operate.  An exam ple is when a personal 
computer m anufacturer of fers two m odels and consum ers buy one enthus iastically a kind of 
selection p rocess takes place in wh ich one type w ill becom e rare.  Selection p rocess es, discussed 
in Section 5.6, cr eate copies of som e agents  or strategies from  a popul ation and elim inate copies 
of others.   
Benefits to individual users th at derive from  the large num ber of other users (e.g., personal 
computers that enjoy robust file  com patibility) can be a strong force in accelerating convergence 
and reducing variety.  W hen a lead typ e becom es the de facto  “best” an d environm ental 
                                                 
55 A type has five important aspects: 
a. Types a re gene rally defined by som e detectable feature(s) of the agents in the population; 
b. Many other dimensions of variety in the population m ay persist in the population without being 
recognized as  types by the agen ts themselves; 
c. The features that distinguish types usual ly provide only an imperfect  indicator for the actual 
diffe rences in action am ong t he agents in the population; 
d. Types a re often endogenous in complex systems – agents within the population m ay detect types an d 
act co nditionally (and  even chan ge type definitions if the syste m is ad aptive); 
e. Types ca n be exogenous as well – de fined only in the minds o f those anal yzing a C AS from the 
outside. 
Op. cit., Axelrod and  Cohen, pp. 37–38. 
 
 5-10
conditions are not changi ng, rapid convergence on a standard can result in  large econom y of scale 
benefits to both the user and th e industry producing  it.  But in changing en vironm ental conditions 
or when  types availab le so far ar e not the best possible , loss of variety can re sult in po tentially 
superior alternatives ne ver being developed.   
Conventional exam ples of  prem ature convergence include the competition between VHS and 
BetaMax system s of video reco rding and the QW ERTY and Dvor ak keyboard arrangem ents.56  
Within a C2 enterp rise th ere is the question of  whether and when to converge  on an IT  standard.   
5.4.1.3  Recombining Mechanisms 
The pr ocess of selec tion only alte rs the  relative frequencies of existi ng types (unl ess copying 
errors are also occurring).  In biology the process of  crossover  recom bines g enetic con tributions 
from both parents by splicing togeth er pieces of already viable genetic m aterial.  This m echanism  
creates novel types in a way that is very different from  the random  changes m ade by m utation.  A s 
a con sequence, crossover is more likely to yield an improvem ent than m utation.   
Concep tual recombinatio n, as a form  of invention, has sim ilar properties.  Exam ples abound and 
many (though not all) have resulted  in transform ational or inters ectional innovati ons including:  
the m otor and wagon com bination of the f irst autom obile; P ixar’s com bination of com puter 
technology and traditiona l filmm aking to create 3D anim ation with lifelik e emotion (e.g., Shrek); 
and Richard Garfield’s combination of board gam es and tr ading cards to cr eate the popular 
collectib le card gam e Magic:  The Gat hering .57  
Another kind of conceptual r ecomb ination (that rep resents the m ore comm on increm ental or 
directional innovation) co mes from  the traditiona l design analysis of a com plex C2 system  in 
which the system  to be develope d is decom posed into sub-proble ms that can be independently 
addressed.  P otential sub-problem  solutions can then be rec ombined in different com binations to 
address the system  problem .   
Constraint relaxation  and assump tion reversa l are other m echan isms pract iced in hum an problem  
solving.  The form er seeks solu tions to a hard problem  by genera ting variants that  relax one or 
more of the situation’s constraints.  It introduces new vari ants by starting wi th materials of 
estab lished f easibility and m odifying them .  Assumption reversa l takes the id ea on e step further:  
it require s solution s to a ctually violate one or more assumptions abou t the solution sp ace.   
                                                 
56 David, Paul, “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY.”  American Economic Review 75  (1985):  pp. 332– 335. 
57 One view of tran sform ational innovation is t hat it fl ourishes in organizations that enable and encourage 
different fields and cultures to meet to purposefully com bine diverse concepts for problem solving.  The 
interested reader is referred to Frans Johansson’s The Medici Effect , Harvard Busi ness School P ress, Boston, 
MA.  2004.   
 5-11
Example:  T he RSA cipher (used as the bas is for  commercia l interne t encryption) was 
developed by reversing the 2500 year old basi c law  of cryptology that required two parties in 
a secure exchange to have the sam e key.58   
The im portant poin t about this example is th at assumption  reversal  enco urages a persp ective of a 
problem  from  a com pletely differe nt viewpoint, breaks problem solv ing out of traditional patterns 
of thought, and allows  the generation of une xpected com binations.59
Crosso ver, concep tual recombina tion and constraint relaxation provide m echanism s that can both 
create new types and change relati ve frequencies.  T hey work with portions of strate gies or agen ts 
already in use to introduce new types by internal processes that have som e degree of correlation 
with the system ’s other conditions.   
5.4.1.4  Exploration  Versus Exploitation 
Explo ration  versus exp loitation  is an im portant trad e-off between the creation of untested types 
that m ay be superior to that whic h currently ex ists as com pared to the copying of te sted types that 
have so far proven best.  This tr ade-off is im portant across a wide range of situations in which the 
testing of new types com es at som e expense to re alizing benefits of those already available.   
This is sim ilar to th e relationship tha t exists between differentiation (as a fo rm of exploration) and 
integration (as a form  of exploita tion) in Figures 5-1 and 5-2.  T oo much exploration can leave an 
organization perm anently disorder ly so that striking  new ideas have thei r underpinnings sw ept 
away in subsequent change be fore it is known whether the new ideas w ill work.  Aggressive 
exploitation risks losing variety too quickly which can happen w hen fast imitation of  an initial 
success  cuts off future ex ploration and possible im provem ent.   
These are not just two ways that good concepts can  go wrong.  T he two possibilities form  a 
fundam ental trade-space.  Invest ments in options and possibilitie s associated with exploration 
often com e at the expense of obt aining returns on w hat has already been lear ned.  This trade-off 
sometimes has a tem poral  aspect to it.   
Example:  In the C2 Constella tion example of Section 2, the en terprise leadership w ill, at 
some point, need to decide wh ether to inves t resources, like capital, engineering talent, and 
management attention, in developing ideas for new constellati on capabilities or in extending 
the service life and performance en velope of existing assets.   
5.4.2 Rules of Thumb on Encouraging Variety 
There are n o hard and fast ru les fo r when one would reliab ly do better with m ore variety.  In an 
“ideal situation” where th e current app roach to a problem  is jud ged the “best poss ible” an d the 
problem  or environm ent is unlikel y to change, exploration is not indicated.  F or other situations 
there are som e broad conditions in which exploration is likely to be of  value.  These are 
                                                 
58 Ibid,, p. 55. 
59 Ibid., pp. 54–55 .   
 5-12
summ arized in Table 5-1, along with rules of thum b for them .  The an ecdotes from  the Linu x 
open source software developm ent experience illustra te how its developm ent philosophy f avors 
exploration and variety.   
 
Table 5-1.  Rules of Thumb on Encouraging Variety60
 
Condition  Rule s of Thumb Examples from Linux 
When problems are l ong-term or 
widespread • The more use that can be made of 
an improvement, the  more it pays to 
bear the costs of search ing for one. • Operating systems are among the 
longest living elements of IT.  
Unix – of which Linux is a free 
version – dates to 1969.   
• Improvement to a n OS is lik ely to 
bear fruit ov er a long  period.   
• The gai ns from an improvement to 
an OS can benefit tho usands or 
millions of  users.   
Problems that provide fast, reliable 
feedback • If you can learn quickly and reliably 
whether an alternative solution 
might be better then you have more 
chances to find an improvement and 
you ha ve long er to gain from what 
you might discover.   
• Where fast and accu rate feedback 
channels don’t exist, try  to create 
them so the benefits of exploration 
can be gained. • In server envi ronments, Linux 
features are  exercised at high rates 
and defects are evi dent quickly.   
• Open distribution enables ever y 
contributor of a proposed variant 
to make a functiona l new version 
that can be tested locally.  This 
increases t he rate of feed back.   
• Quality of propos ed variants can 
be assessed with re latively high 
reliability .   
Problems with low risk of catastrophe  
from exploration • If the risk of an extremely bad resu lt 
from exploration c an be judged as 
low then consider increasi ng the 
amount y ou are willing  to do.   
• Try to creat e ways to lower risk of 
extremely bad results so the benefits 
of exploration c an be gained. • The Linux culture has a well-
developed philosophy of modula r 
isolation.  Interdependence among 
compone nts is strictly governed in 
a way that limits the chance of 
catastrophic  consequences from 
exploration.   
Problems that have loom ing disasters • If continui ng to exploit the best 
soluti on found to date will likely to 
lead to disaster, then exp lore.   
• The relative attractiveness of 
exploring comes from the negat ive 
yield of exploiting .   • This condit ion is a property of the 
motivation of some developers 
more than a property of Linux 
open software developm ent, per 
se.   
• Many Linux contributors fear the 
extinction of the Unix  OS f amily 
in which they have invested their 
expertise. 
• Others fear the hegemony of 
Microsoft OSs.   
  
                                                 
60 Op. cit., Ax elrod and  Cohen, pp. 50–58. 
 5-13
5.4.3 Extinction 
Ignoring the sharp effect of ex tinction can have profound im plicat ions in m any com plex social 
system s.61 Real populations have f inite numbers of discrete agents or  artifacts and the difference 
between having a few and zero is not just a little extra waiti ng tim e.  Recreating a type lo st to th e 
population can be unlikely.  It  is more likely that it s niche will be occupied  by another type which 
may not have an im portant fe ature of the original.   
The reverse issue is that it m atters enorm ously whether th e num ber of people who have thought of 
an idea is one or zero.  We see this in small ways  all the tim e.  For ex ample, o nce a difficult an d 
long-standing mathem atical con jecture is finally proved subseque nt and usually shorter, m ore 
elegan t proofs quick ly em erge.   
This sugg ests th at there is  real ri sk in a view that assum es all that  is needed for an id ea to em erge 
are circum stances th at will bring it rapidly to prom inence.  Th e distinction between this view and 
one that und erstands the ef fect of extinction has relevance for po licy s trategies.   For exam ple, 
“counting on the m arket to find a so lution,” can be expected  to work m ore rapi dly and reliably in 
domains where several approaches  have been partially worked out as opposed to a dom ain in 
which a feasible app roach is yet to be conceived. 
5.4.4 Summary 
Variety  plays  a critical role in  the evolution of a complex enterp rise.  T he focus in this section h as 
been on m anaging variation thr ough m echanism s that create and destroy variety in  a population.  
These are fundam ental to chan ging the com position of populat ions over tim e.  There is a 
fundam ental trade-off between ex ploitation and exploration.  Th e form er creates agents or 
strategies similar to type s that have already been successful.  T he latter creates  types that are likely 
to be substantially novel.  Ex tinction of types m ay be signif icant in a com plex enterp rise. 
5.5 Interaction62 
Interaction am ong agents shapes the creation and destru ction of variety and produces the events 
that drive attribution of credit.  W hen thinking about the variety of agents and their strategies one 
is led to th e question of the right balance between variety and uniform ity.  T his balance is 
achieved partially th rough interaction w hich seek s to answer, “what or (w ho) should interact with 
what (or who) and when?”  Intera ction patterns and their influences  are all around us , as illustrated 
by th e fam iliar exam ple below.   
 
                                                 
61 Many conventional theories for anal yzing populations are based on assumptions of continuous modeling 
traditions (the so-called n ano-fox property in wh ich predator-prey m odels grow and shrink  by proportionality 
constan ts).  In these th eories th ere is no  complete ex tinction so no matter how severe the starvat ion, the predator 
population will reb ound as soo n as the prey return. 
62 Op. cit., Ax elrod and  Cohen, pp. 62–116. 
 5-14
Example:  O ur individual netw orks of current acquaintances have a strong local bias because 
it is convenient to wo rk, shop, attend school, and become af filiated w ith civic and religious 
institutions near hom e.    
More fundam entally, and beyond m anipulating variety and unif ormity, inte ractions help shape the 
outcom e space within which a com plex system  develops as depicted  in Figure 5-2.  Events of 
interes t with in a com plex social sy stem arise (o r do not) from  the interacti ons of its agents with 
each other and with  artifacts, as il lustrated by the ex ample below.   
Example:  T he 1961 French mili tary putsch against Charles de Gaulle, precipitated by his 
policies on A lgeria, failed before it could get off the ground.  None of the officers had taken 
more than a passing notice when t housands of transistor  radios were issued  to French troops 
several weeks before de G aulle ’s Algeria policy announ cement.   The rad ios were rega rded as 
a harmless comfort for the troops aimed at relieving th eir boredom.  But de Gaulle used them 
to broadcast directly to the tr oops his reasons for the Algeria policy.  Though the policy was 
wildly unpopular w ith most career soldiers in  leadership roles, de  Gaulle succeeded in 
convincing thousands of conscripts of the w isdom of his choice.  This one-on-m any interaction 
between de Gaulle and hi s troops, over the heads of their interm ediate leaders, broke the back 
of the revolt before it started.63
Interact ion patt erns shape t he events in which m embers of a complex social system  beco me 
directly involved and they provid e the opportun ity for spreading and recom bining of types that 
lead to creation and destruction.  The events drive processes of selection and am plification that 
ultim ately change the frequency a nd variety of agent types.  Inte raction patterns help determ ine 
what will be successfu l for the agents and th e system and this , in turn, w ill help shape the 
dynam ics of the interactio n patterns them selves. 
5.5.1 How  Interaction Works:  Proximity and Activation 
When think ing abou t patterns  of interaction it is useful to different iate two classes of 
determ inants:  proximity factors  and activation fa ctors.  The distinction betw een the two roughly 
equates to that between space and time. 
Proximity fa ctors determ ine how agents com e to be likely to interact with e ach other (or not).  
Norm ally, w e pay a lot of attent ion to physical proxim ity but w e are all part of num erous other 
relational networks tha t establish proxim ity.  Som e exam ples are:   organizational proxim ities, 
interest group affiliatio ns, political parties, etc.  These all inf luence the li kelihood of whether 
particular agents or classes or agents will inter act and the nature of their interaction .   
 
                                                 
63 Forsyth,  F., The Day of the Jackal.  New York, NY.  Bantam Books, 19 85, pp. 20–21.   
 5-15
Time scale af fects our perspective on proxim ity.  On a sho rt time scale p roximity focuses largely  
on the issue of how likely it is that  a particular agent or group of agen ts will interact with a larger 
population.   
Example:  When looking for a new job it is common for an i ndividual to interact w ith a 
network of peers who have similar business or  technology interests,  and work environm ent 
preferences ( action-oriented versus contemplative;  research versus production; academ ic 
versus applied, etc.)  to identify compan ies with cu ltures compat ible to the job  seeker.  T he 
focus of this shor t-term pr oximity dyn amic is on  fit of an agent (job cand idate) into what is  
perceived as a relatively fixed  population (a company) .   
On a lo nger tim e scale, th e focus on proxim ity can change.  W hile in the short run, a place of work 
shapes what kinds of individual s join the com pany, ultim ately th e individuals w ho com e on board 
shape the com pany.   
Example:  A  company provides a technologically sophisticated consulting service to a large 
client.  The company and the client both agreed that collocat ion with the clie nt would form a 
stronger partnership and th e change w as made.  It is natural  and prudent for the company to 
place increased emphasis on the tech nical sta ffs’ ability to intera ct with th e client.  But if it is 
done at the expense of technical know-how (for example, by  hiring large numbers of staff who 
come from the client ranks and know its culture better than the needed  technology)  over tim e 
the company risks losing what attr acted it to  the client in the  first place – its technological 
sophistication.   
Thus, a structure that seem s fixed in the sho rt term  (like a com pany’s culture and e xpertise) can be 
changed in profound ways over tim e by co-evolutionary dynam ics.   
Activation factors  determine the s equencin g of activities.  Th e term  activa tion groups together 
many different processes th at affect th e timing of  agent ac tivity.  It is useful to differentiate 
system s with periodic or  “clocked” activations (e .g., budget or other calendar  driven cycles) from  
conditiona lly activated p rocesses in w hich the results of a cu rrent event control which events m ay 
occur next.  In the form er type  of sys tem events are activ ated by global, rigidly controlled 
mechanism s while in  the latter ev ents are activ ated locally  and f lexibly.   
The distinction can be profound.  To use a sim ple exam ple, consider the di fference between 
“ready, aim , fire” and “fire at will.”64  The decen tralization  inherent in a conditiona lly activated 
process like “fire at will ” is no rmally assum ed to be an ad vantage since th e adaptiv e capacity of a 
system  is increased wh en even ts can be activ ated locally and flex ibly ra ther than glob ally an d 
rigidly.  Bu t this is a two-edged  sword:  adaptive capacity can speed ex tinctio n as well as in creas e 
viability.  Just as in variation  where neither exploration nor ex ploitation is a lways preferable, 
neither greater internal cont rol nor greater decentralization is necessarily better.   
                                                 
64 Op. cit., Axelrod and Cohen, p. 63. 
 5-16
Example:  P ermitting financial traders to respond to local conditions ca n let them quickly 
exploit short-lived arbitrage pos sibilities.  But when  globally determined prices contradict 
traders’ assumption s it can lead th em to a rapid sequence of ever  riskier tra des to cover loses 
with the potential for financial catastrophe.65   
A major question in structuring in teraction patterns is whe ther interactions w ill be conc entra ted 
among a few pairs of types or w ill be spread across a wide range of type pair ings.  This involves a 
trade-off between intense  and diffuse interactions am ong types.  Th at is, over tim e, should the 
interactions of an agen t repeatedly be with o thers from a lim ited num ber of types or with others 
drawn from  a wider range of types? 
Example:  E ngineers who stay t ogether in a stable work group with the sam e leader as they 
progress through different projec ts experience intense intera ction patterns.  T hose who 
change work groups and pr oject leaders as  they move among projects  experience diffuse 
intera ction p atterns.66   
Issues tha t arise in th e intense interaction  pattern  are in sufficien t exploration and loss of variety.  
An iss ue that arises in the diffuse interaction  pattern is that prior accom plishm ents m ay not be 
fully exploited in subsequent work  groups.  But there is  nothing inherent about  this alignment.   
Diffuseness can favo r exploitation.   
The po int ab out the in tense/diffuse trade-off is that it alerts us to a set of que stions that need to be 
asked about how the shaping of proximity  and activation  in a c omplex soc ial system will af fect 
the exploration-exploitation balance, along w ith other as pects of the system .   
5.5.2 How  Interaction Works:  Physical and Conceptual Spaces 
A fundam ental property of an agent is its location.  Agents have location in the usual physical 
space an d tim e sense.  T he movem ent of ag ents in space and tim e changes their proxim ity and 
hence their ease of interaction.  W hen agents inter act they are eith er ph ysically co-located o r the 
interaction takes place via tec hnology.  So th e concept of location  applies to intera ction s, as well.   
Examples:   
• Learning news  in a conversation at the town square.   
• Discussing a work proposal via a teleconference.   
• Purchasing a text from an on- line mail orde r catalog.   
Using the idea of physical  space and tim e as an an alogy we can consider the location  of ag ents 
and the ir interactions in other kinds of spaces.   
Example:  A  company organization chart provides a map of a conceptual space.  T he director 
of purchasing is “ near” those who do purchasing in  the sense that the ir interactions are like ly 
                                                 
65 Ibid,, p. 63. 
66 Ibid,, p. 69. 
 5-17
to be frequent even though  purchasing agents may be physi cally distributed across the 
company’s business locations.  At the sa me time, the purchasi ng director may be 
organizationally far from someone  working in marketing even th ough that office is next door.  
It is the logic of role s in an organization that makes in dividuals more or le ss like ly to 
intera ct.67   
In fact, a way of th inking abou t organization s is as a deliberately des igned concep tual sp ace th at 
will “o rganize” the in teraction of agents toward some end s.   
Example:  R ecall the geograph ically divided engineering co nsulting group of Section 5.2.  
The manager altered the roles of away location staff and be gan having weekly teleconferences 
between the two locations to in crease the frequency and nature of interactions betw een her 
local client and away lo cation staff.  Th is inc reased the v isibility of away st aff and succeeded 
in changing the perception of their value to the client.   
Organizations are a fam iliar exam ple of conceptual spaces  but they are not the only kind.  All that 
is requ ired is that the concepts con vey a sense of multip le categories tha t can be locations,  that 
agents in the population can be  members of different categor ies (and thus ha ve different 
locations), and that the locations convey som ething about the lik elihood that agents will interact.  
Techn ical ex pertise, sim ilarity  of roles, rank or other forms of status, f luency in a certain foreign 
language, and sim ilarity of work problem s are a few exam ples of concepts that can also s erve as 
conceptu al spaces.   
Differences in the tim ing of even ts in a com plex system  can have  a large effect on outcom es.  A 
chang e that increas es proximity, that m akes agen ts more lik ely to in teract, m eans th at on averag e 
the interaction will  occur sooner.  Re versing the order of  events m ay change the character or 
likelihood of thos e events.  The s ystem can h ave an enti rely different histor y, as a result.   
Example:  T he D-Day results ( and that of World War II)  may ha ve been dramatic ally different 
had the 3rd Reich learned of the true location o f the main a ttack befo re it was  laun ched.   
5.5.3 Methods of Shaping Interaction Patterns 
Specific mechanism s to harness com plexity by  shaping interactions fall into two class es:  extern al 
and internal.  External  mechanism s are ways to m odify the system  from  the outside (e.g., 
designing artifacts or polic ies that change the ru les others play by).  Internal mechanism s are ways 
to change the i nteraction patt erns that are driven by pr ocess es within the sys tem.  Each can  be 
thought of as a form  of filtering that selectively a llows m ore interactions with certain agents and 
less with others.   
                                                 
67 Ibid,, p.73. 
 5-18
5.5.3.1  External Methods 
The prin cipal mechanism s availab le to chang e intera ction patterns from  outsi de of a system are:  
barriers to movem ent in tim e and physical space; barriers to m ovem ent in conceptual space; sem i-
perm eable barriers and activation in sequence or in parallel.   
Barriers to m ovem ent in time and physical space :  Examples of barriers  to interaction exist 
throughout our social world including national border s, prisons, private club s, com puter networks 
deliberately disconnected  from  other networks, and m iddle sc hools that isolat e juveniles facing 
the onset of adolescence from  childre n who are either younger or older.  T he esse ntial effect is to 
make som e agents m ore proxim ate and others less.  Exam ples of barriers in clude direct ch anges to 
physical space such as adding walls.  E xamples also include alteration of the technology of 
moving through physical spac e:  building tie corrido rs am ong a corporations campus of buildings.  
Any barrier has an opposite, e.g ., rem oving walls, or elim inatin g existing tie corridors.   
Time can be altered by control ling the technology f or moving through it.  W riting is a m eans of 
interacting across space and with the f uture.  R eading is a technology for inte racting w ith the past.  
Many IT advances can be understood as reducing the ba rriers to interactions  across space and/or 
time.  Som e have a 1-to-m any broadcas t property (e.g., radi o and television).68  When controlled 
by central authorities they  have enormous power to m ake di verse and disperse d populations m ore 
homogeneous in their knowl edge, loyalties and language, as evidenced by the exam ple of d e 
Gaulle’s policies on A lgeria.   
A major lim itation of these kinds  of barriers is the ir impreci se selectiv ity.  Crude physical 
boundaries rarely cluster together all the agents who woul d benefit and only those.  T echnological 
interventions that rem ove barrie rs often increase both wanted and unwanted interactions:  f or 
exam ple, the world w ide web whic h brings us closer to both de sirable and undesirable groups.   
Barriers to m ovem ent in concep tual space:  This is an ex tension of  the basic barrier app roach that 
achieves greater s electivity.  Conceptu al spaces  are used b y agents them selves to m ake 
distinctions.  Exam ples, previously noted in S ection 5.5.2, include technical expertise, sim ilarity 
of roles, rank or other form s of status, fluency in a ce rtain foreign language, similarity of work 
problem s and a host of ot her categories.  The “loc ation” of each of thes e conceptu al spaces  is 
delim ited by boundaries to m ovement which ar e largely defined thr ough a com plex system ’s 
social conventions.  For exam ple, it would be an unusual junior staff m ember who chooses to sit 
in a company cafet eria at a tabl e of executive directors.   
These con ceptual b arriers  place m ore refined and selectiv e filters on patterns of inter action than 
physical barriers.  T his is an enorm ous advantage as a m eans of  shaping interaction patterns.  The 
disadvantage of conceptual barrie rs is under-explorati on because they restri ct interactions to 
homogeneous and fam iliar pools of  other agents as suggested by the following exam ple.   
                                                 
68 Ibid., p. 79. 
 5-19
Example:  Members of  highly specialized technology co mmunities tend to  advance their 
discipline in fairly predict able steps along a well-defined di mension because they primarily 
combin e concepts with in their field.  T his evo lution via re finement and  adjustment is wha t 
Paul Maed er69 calls “ single-disciplinary incremen talism.”  I t rarely leads to transformational 
discoveries in a field, wh ich are more likely to occur when a  multid isciplinary team addresses 
a problem.   
Semi-permeable barriers:  A semi-perm eable barrier  is anything that prev ents som e kinds of 
interactions while perm itting othe rs.  E xamples include gates an d guards who exercise selective 
access control; network f irewalls; and V chip s for te levisions.   
In a com plex hum an social sy stem many exam ples of semi-perm eable barr iers involve delegating 
a person to m ake choices which involve conditionally opening or closing a barrier to an agen t 
wishing to m ove through it.  Inse rting a hum an in the loop is comm on since the desi red selectivity 
is importan t and us ually not easy to au tomate well.  Exam ples include secretaries who contr ol 
access to th eir sup ervisor’s o ffice and calendar; and certificati on boards that te st, accredit and 
expel m embers of professions such as law, m edicine , and teaching.   
As a tech nique for shap ing interaction s, sem i-permeable barriers are m ost useful when  an 
overwhelm ing num ber of interact ions that consum e tim e and re sources ar e possi ble, and the 
agents seeking access are not well known.  On the other hand, sem i-perm eable barriers (as well as 
conceptual barriers) m ay admit the wrong agents or  block the right ones. 
The ch ief ad vantage of sem i-permeable barriers is the increa sed precision of blocking and 
perm itting movem ent in physical and social space.  Sem i-perm eable barri ers can allow passage 
where adm ission should be governed  by m omentary conditions or in  situations wh ere rules cannot 
cover well all the circum stances th at may arise.   
The d isadvantage of sem i-perm eable barriers is the  possible m ismatc h between the rules or 
criteria governing the  selective adm ission and the long- term welf are of the system  behind the 
barrier.   
Example:  A  company which has succeede d for years using ou tmoded manufacturing 
processes may not survive econom ically if it cont inues to focus its hiri ng efforts on individuals 
who have only those skills.   
Activa tion in sequ ence or  parall el:  Most m echanism s discussed t hus far involve the deliberate 
manipulation of physical or  conceptual spaces.  But the indivi dual, m anager or policy m aker m ay 
have the opportunity to  manipulate time.   
Example:  When a new system is being developed, there may be many  compone nts of the 
overa ll design with the configuration of each on e depending to some de gree on the designs of 
others.   
                                                 
69 Paul  Maeder is the founder of the highly regarded venture capital firm Highland Capital.   
 5-20
The conventional approach to desi gn interdependence has been to work in se quence.  Part of 
the art of managing sequential de sign is to choose a sequence in which the discoveries of 
problems at later stages do not force too many change s in the res ults of earlier stages.  A 
major d rawback is tha t it requ ires a long elapsed time from beginning of  first design stage to 
completion of the last.   
There has been a large m ove to parallel design of complicate d products.  The designers w ork 
on all components at the same ti me.  T he project is completed in  the time required to design 
the most time-consuming sing le compo nent.  Th is rearrang emen t may offer a large 
improvement if the comm unication and c oordination among the si multaneous design 
subprojects does not sl ow them or introduce inconsistencies.   
The gain occurs (if it does)  by a re-sequencing of the interactions am ong the agents in the 
design team.  In the sequential  design, designers of a compon ent in teract with designers of 
components “upstream” by rece iving finished plans and perhaps even prototype artifacts. 
In the p arallel d esign the  work of any one component desi gn teams is contem porary with 
perhaps many others since al l team are active simultaneously.  Co mmunications among the 
subprojects cannot be so much via finished plans and artifacts as it is in projections and 
models of what other com ponents will be like in the end.   
CAD tools, for example, e nable coordination and communica tion, in parallel design.  A 
“working” simulation of the enti re product is built and each new version of a component is 
reflected in a change in the simu lation which must continue to show that the overall product 
still “works.”  This shared model is a ri ch ar tifact that h elps achieve the n eeded 
coordination.70
Increasingly, business processes within enterp rises are moving to wards gr eater automation and 
interconnectivity with the resu lt that more inform ation is becom ing available to m ore individuals 
faster.  A consequence is  that the sequencing of  events in com plex social system s is being 
manipulated by advances resultin g from  the inform ation revolu tion, som etimes in subtle but 
important ways.  This has profound implications (legal, privacy-related, and cu ltural, to nam e a 
few) that are only beginn ing to be understood.71  
Example:  C ompany A has a well-developed in tranet which includes a directory of all 
employees.  The web page for each employee contains basic information such as office 
location, telephone number, position, and grade.   
When an ind ividual is pro moted, comp any po licy has been to info rm the emplo yee priva tely 
(preferably face-to-face)  and then inform the rest of the organization (usual ly via email) .   
                                                 
70 Ibid., pp. 84–86 . 
71 While it is to o early to  say for certain, Social Computing syste ms may have the potential for tran sform ing 
how we view and use enterprise tools.  Social Co mputing inclu des people, organizatio ns, and their activ ities as 
fundam ental system  com pone nts, with a goal  of enabling i dentity, behavi or, social relationshi ps, and e xperie nce 
to be  used as s olution elem ents.  See , for e xample, http://www.research .ibm.com/So cialCo mputing/.    
 5-21
But the process between approval  of a promotion (or any pay grade change, for that matter)  
and posting to the corpor ate intranet had beco me so automated and ef ficient that changes 
began being posted before the indi vidual had been  informed.   
Since most employees ha ve little occasion to visit their own web page , their peers (who might 
be looking up the employee’s telephone numbe r) would notice a pr omotion and call to 
congratulate the unknow ing recipi ent of the promotion.  It was usually a pleasant, if 
somewhat perplexing discussion.  O f course, learning of a demotion this way can be a 
devas tating exper ience for an employee.   
The company resolved the altere d timeline by inse rting a manual step in the approval-to-
posting process to assure  an employee had been no tified of a grade cha nge before it becam e 
publicly available. 
5.5.3.2  Internal Methods 
Internal m ethods for changing in teraction patterns ar e mechanism s that de pend on interactions 
within the system  to stimulate further activation of agents.  There are several m ajor m ethods:  
following another agent; follow ing a signal; form ing boundarie s; separating tim e scales; 
redistributing stress; or ganizing routines; and restructuring of physical and co ncept ual spaces. 
Follow ing another agent :  One of  the simplest m echanism s that can m odify inte raction patterns 
arises from  one agent staying near  another.  The m ost basic exam ples involve staying nearby in a 
physical space.  The general char acter of the m echanism  persists  even when the proxim ity is 
conceptu al.   
The biologica l prototype  of this m echanism is adhesion  in which one organism  sticks to another 
or stays close to it.   The  effect is tha t the “following ” agent exp eriences a p attern of interactions 
similar to that of the “leading” agent.  Addition ally, there is more interaction between follower 
and leader and the follower m eets people (a gents) the leader know s.   
Examples:  T here are many ex amples of agent following in cluding apprenti ceships, big-
brother/big-sist er, aide-de-camp and general officer,  and mentoring relati onships.  They all 
share  an element of acquiring the in teraction patterns and strategies of the leader, who serves 
as a kind of template.72  
In following, an agent can taci tly pick up the contac t pattern of a leader  witho ut necessarily 
understanding the th eory of (or causes and effect s of) that pattern.  Good th eories can be costly to 
                                                 
72 In the world of computer net works this kind of mechani sm has been  general ized in “recom mender”  systems 
which allow users to “adh ere” to  the tastes of others, in order to in teract with persons and  objects t he 
recom mender s ystem has enc ountered.  This is used in the world of taste goods (e.g., books and music), for 
finding professional assistance (dentists, stockbrokers) and for finding discussion groups or web pages of 
interest.  The information re volution makes possible recom mendat ions based on a statistical synthesis of others 
that might be closer t o predicting an individual’s personal tastes than any other si ngle user or even a 
profession al critic.   
 5-22
create and share with others and they m ay not alw ays be ne eded.  Many, m aybe m ost, well-
executed hum an social interactions occur w ithout benefit of explicit knowledge, let alone a 
theoretical understanding of why a pattern of behavior works well.  For the most part, knowledge 
transm itted v ia agen t follo wing serves peop le well, even if it may carry along som e 
counterproductive be liefs.  The m echanism  of copying the interaction pa tterns of other agents 
passes along vital social  knowledge and allows an agent to adapt (to the environm ent which is 
new to him  or her but not the le ader) with out requiring an explicit und erstanding of com plex 
social sy stems.   
Of course, problem s can arise when  interaction patterns  learned by following are tran sferred to 
new con texts, including situations in w hich the current context changes, si nce the selectivity of  a 
more precis e theo ry is not avai lable to sort out which features  should be modi fied and whic h 
retained.   
Example:  Ways of inte racting with a consulting  client that evolved in  an era of physical 
separation and communication via written report can work poo rly when transferred to a 
collocated, interactive team environm ent.   
Copying another agent has a further effect in addition to  picking up the othe r’s patterns of 
interactions.  At the pop ulation level, copyi ng others’ interact ion patterns also introduces strong 
correlation am ong the contac t patterns of the agents  with the resulting so cial system  having a 
strong cliquish property.  An a dvantage of the form ation of soci al networks w ith correlated 
properties is that agents in such  a population will have  a strong overlap w ith the contact patterns 
(and thus the strategies and knowle dge) of m ost agents w ith which they interact.  This overlap 
implies shared assum ptions and comm on understandi ngs and these, in turn , simplify transactions 
of all kinds.  Explanatio ns can be brief and resu lt in few m isunderstandin gs.  Consequences of 
actions can be m ore correctly anti cipated.  The ease of comm unication helps build social  capital.   
There are disadvantages to a social st ructure that devel ops through pervasive agent  following.  It 
can res ult in a lo ss of information d iversity.  Frequent interactions of co lleagues who all know one 
another can lead to reduced divers ity of  the inform ation they hold  as a group.  This can have the 
effect of redu cing an agen t’s ab ility to explore a wide  space of options whet her the a gent is an 
individual, w ork group or enterpri se.  S urprisingly, im portant inf ormation usually does not com e 
from a clos e circle of colleagu es but from  acquain tances at th e edge of an indi vidual’s social 
world.  If agent  following mechanism s pred ominate in an organization , the culture may evolve to 
one of insufficient exploration and prem ature co nvergence.   
A consequence is that a healthy professional social network should probably contain a m ix of 
strongly and weakly clustered contacts to prov ide a balance of exploitati on and exploration.  This 
is similar in its ess entials to an im porta nt small world73 property, exem plified by Mark 
                                                 
73 Watts, D unca n J., Six Degre es:  The Science of a Connected Age.  New  York, NY.  W.  W.  Norton & Co.  
2003. 
 5-23
Granov etter’s circles of friends,74 notionally depicted in Figure 5- 4, wher e those  with in the  same 
circle know each other well and comm unication w ith other ci rcles is m aintained  by a f ew we ak 
ties. 
 
Clusters of strong  ties Weak t ies 
 
 
Figure 5-4.  Strong and Weak Ties (Granovetter’s Circle of Friends) 
 
Follow ing a signal :  Ano ther strateg y that an agen t can u se to alter its intera ction pattern is to 
follow s ome detec table signal , moving toward locations that have better value.75  The m ovem ent 
creates new patterns of in teraction for the f ollowing agen t.  From the perspective of an external 
designer, this strate gy provides an opportunity to create o r modify signals that agen ts follow in 
order to a lter their patterns of interaction.   
People an d other ag ents move in space toward desi rable signals:  spacious  offices w ith privacy 
and quiet; roles perc eived as having higher va lue and  impact; jo bs at co mpanies with intellectual 
stature in a particular com munity.  These are patterns of m oving through physical or conceptual 
space by following a signal .  The di rect effect  is to bring the age nt into  a situation that is perceived 
as more desirable.  The indirect effect is to br ing the  agen t into the interaction patt ern prevailing in 
                                                 
74 Baraba si, Albert-Laszlo .  Linked .  Cam bridge, MA.   Plume Books.   2003, pp. 41–44. 
75 Finding a new signal and moving towards it is the essential message of  many self-improvem ent best sellers 
like Spe ncer Johnson’s Who Move d My C heese? G.P. Putnam’s Sons .  New York, NY .  1998.   
 5-24
the new location.  T he agent ente rs the social networ k of the new location.  So, while agents 
generally m ove along a gradient fo r its own sake (to ge t a quieter office or  make m ore money) 
they experience the ind irect effects of these inte raction patterns, which m ay not  have been fully 
anticipated. 
A disadvantage of following a sign al is that an ag ent can g et stuck at a local m aximum and not 
find the global one.  T his is a comm on problem  in com plex adap tive systems.  A strategy  for 
dealing with a signal for the global m aximum not being detectab le from a current loca tion is f or 
the agen t to m ake larg e exploratory moves to determ ine whether th at signal can be picked up from  
a different vantage point.   
Example:  A n individual may be in the “best job” in her curr ent company but there may be a 
better one in another com pany which remains unknown unless she se eks outside 
opportunities.   
Example:  D uring the 1980s, rival groupings of computer co mpanies formed to advocate 
different standards fo r the Unix operating system.  T he several groupings seem to have 
developed their coalitions by a logic of considering only sm all changes in the space of 
possible coalitions.76
There are d ifferences between signal  and agent  following.  S ignals are usually ass ociated with 
locations rather than agents.  Following a signal relie s implicitly – and some times explicitly – on a 
belief that the signal goes  together with cons equences an agen t will prefer.  Si gnal following leads 
to locations that attrac t others who follow the sam e or relate d signal.  Agent following leads to 
others an age nt inter acts with, through whatev er mechan ism. 
An advantage of s ignal following is that it can p rovide an exp licit context for interpreting what 
happens.  If an individual ch anged jobs because he percei ved the new com pany as being 
intellectually distinguished and finds he is enjoying his new coll eagues, the improved intellectual 
environm ent is a likely ca use.  Another advantage of  signal following is that the consequences of 
the resulting patterns of in teraction can be evaluate d as reasonably specific criteria.  One can say, 
“I wan ted a m ore action -orien ted environm ent an d it is. ”  In agent following  it may be m ore 
difficult to know what cr iteria to app ly to the re sulting in teractio ns since the signal m ay not be 
causally asso ciated with the interactions experienced.   
Example:  A n employee goes  to a “better” job but has a bad year because of his new 
supervisor’s unrecognized manage ment style problems.  Since the employee does not know 
the tru e caus e he ma y incorrect ly conclude that the problem stemmed from some distinctive 
feature of the new job.   
A disadvantage of signal following  is that the signal m ay be a po or predictor of the quality of 
interactions that follow. 
                                                 
76 Axelrod, Robe rt.  The Comp lexity o f Coo peration.  Princeton U niversity Press.   Princet on, NJ. 1997.    
 5-25
Form ing boundaries :  What is the sim ilarity am ong a zebr a’s stripes, sharpl y defined ethnic 
neighborhoods in a large m etropolitan area like Boston (e.g., Chinatown, North End), the 
concentrations of diffe rent m erchants (e.g., gold  dealers, rug dealers) in downtown Ankara, 
Turkey, and splinter groups in politi cal wings, both left  and right?  They are all exam ples of 
striking patterns characte rized by sharp boundaries.   
How are th ese pattern s form ed?  Different as they  seem  to be, these are all exam ples of pattern 
formation by local activation, long- range inhibition (LALI).  T he basic principle is that a pattern 
that h as been “depo sited” in on e area m akes it m ore likely that another, similar deposit will occur 
nearby and less like that a sim ilar deposit w ill occu r farther awa y.77  Nearby areas will have many 
deposits and, as a re sult, areas farther away will have strong pressures to be cl ear.  Together, these 
two forces lead to the form ation of sharp boundaries.   
As the ex amples sug gest, LALI works  across a wide range of sp aces, both physical and 
conceptual:  patchy ethn ic neighborhoods in re sidential areas of citi es, splinter groups on a 
political extrem e wing, spots on a Dalm atian’s back, groupings of ideologically like-m inded 
individuals who attract those w ho sh are th eir views a nd oppose the “heresie s” of those who do 
not. 
Example:  A rchipelagos and networks of mounta in valleys are examples  of LALI at work.  
Research has shown that for bi ological populations they are the ideal breeding ground for 
novel life-forms.  The Galapagos Islands are a familia r example.  In th ese settings sem i-
isolated p opulations breed with  relatively infrequent exchanges of an imals.  Improvements 
occur but spread slowly enough to avoi d a rapid loss of diversity.   
Care must be taken in choosing  actions for human social or or ganizational settings based on 
simple analogy to breeding biol ogical populations.  Th e mechanisms of re production are very 
differen t, as are the cr iteria for a ssessi ng change.   
Never theless,  an org anization tha t judicious ly clusters networks (or facilita tes their 
formation)  may cr eate a more favorable environment for diversit y and adaptation.  In this 
kind of organization ea rly innovations spread more slow ly and variety th at can provide 
mater ial for late r imp rovement is re tained.  P remature convergence is less likely to occur.  To 
the extent that the biological  analogy is appropriate to hum an organizational settings, there 
are implications for how the or ganizational structure and policies  of an enterpri se facilitate 
or inhibit innovation and adaptation. 78
The po int in  presenting the abov e exam ple79 is no t to re comm end eith er resisting o r facilitating the 
loss of variety in a com plex so cial sys tem.  Rather , it is to pose the question in term s of the 
                                                 
77 Bonabea u, Eric.  From Clas sical Models of Morphogenesis to  Agent-Based Mod els of Pattern  Formation.  
Santa Fe In stitute Work ing Pap er 97-07-063, 199 7.   
78 Axelrod, Robe rt.  The Comp lexity o f Coo peration.  Princeton U niversity Press.   Princet on, NJ. 1997.    
79 Note the simil arities b etween th e arch ipelago  in th is example and the strong and weak  ties of Gran ovetter’s 
Circle of Friends discussed in 5.5.3.2 and depicted in Figure 5-4.   
 5-26
structure of networks of hum an interactions in s uch a sys tem, so that advantag es, disadvantages,  
costs, and interv ention s can be considered.   
Separating tim e scales :80  There is a tendency of m any soci al system s to assum e hierarchical 
shapes.  The upper layers of such  system s typically i nvolve processes that span longer tim e 
intervals while the  lowe r leve ls are more often involved with processes that run relatively quickly.  
Generals and t heir staff concer n them selve s with the ques tion of what cam paigns should be 
entered in the weeks or months to com e, whil e Army Brig ade an d Air F orce Air Operatio ns 
Center p lanners con cern them selves  with  the production of ground opera tion and air m ission plans 
for the next f ew days.   
This hierarchical arrangement  of time scal es supports effective governance in com plex social 
system s, which is why it is often seen in th e military and indu stry.  The slower activity at the 
upper levels establishes a st able context for faster processes at th e lower levels.  It  helps in taking a 
defended hilltop if the def inition of the enemy does not change while you ar e attacking it.  It helps 
in providing a se rvice if the definition of the c lient does not change whil e you are providing it.  
Hierarchies h ave the pro perty that every  elem ent of the sy stem (but the top one) has a supervisor.  
So, whenev er a supero rdinate elem ent acts, it es tablishes a context that allows its su bordinates to 
act in concert.  This is useful in ac hieving the benefits of coordination.   
This separation of tim e scales in com plex so cial sys tems is ad vantageous.  Actions  with long time 
frames tend to becom e assigned to  positions that govern  levels in which ac tions hav e shorter time 
frames.  System s that org anize this way will have a competitive a dvantage.   
In most organizations, the assignm ent of actions to di fferent levels within the  organ ization is done 
by agents within them .  If those agents understand this pr inciple, it offers th em an opportunity to 
adapt their organization w hen ch anges occur to its environm ent.   
Example:  C onsider a company  that provides a technologically sophi sticated consulting 
service to a client.  If the cl ient’s consulting needs begin to change very rapidly, it may be 
advantageous for de partment and division managers to re linquish product q uality oversight 
and reassign it to lower level managers or e ven individual staff.  Th e department or division 
managers then focus on the long-term reputation of  the company with the client and within the 
technology and busin ess communities of which it is a part.  In this  way, management still 
continues to influence the pr oducts em ployees prod uce but they do it  by shaping the 
company’s reputation which at tracts certain types of cl ients and employees.   
The po int of the abov e example is not  that the line of  reasoning in it is alw ays right.  The point is it 
represents a pers pective that com es from  and lead s to the r ight kinds of questions. 
Redistributing stress :  This is a m echanism  that depends on in teractions w ithin the system to 
stimulate fu rther activ ation of agents.  Per Bak ha s studied a w ide range of  systems in wh ich som e 
kind of stress propagates through  the system  (sand piles, snow  fields, underground rock layers) 
                                                 
80 Simon, He rbert A.  Sciences o f the Artificia l.  Cam bridge , MA.  M IT Press. 1981, pp 193–229.   
 5-27
which releas e in avalanch es an d earthq uakes .81  The attribute of a system  which gives rise to these 
events is called “s elf organized criticality .”82  In Bak’s work the sy stems consist only of artifacts.  
Later work has shown that som e of the results can apply to system s that inclu de agents.  E xamples 
are traffic jam s and the m ass extinction of species.   
What is ha ppening in all these in stanc es is that a small ev ent may or m ay not trigger other events 
(such as avalanches or earthquak es).  B ak’s group has repeatedly found that the events follow the 
power law distribution.83  The principle can be illustrated by the distribution of  the sizes of wars 
as well as the sizes of avalanch es.  T here are m any sm all wars, a moderate num ber of medium  
sized wars, and a very few large wars.  Anoth er important result abou t thes e system s is th at after 
they build to the ir critical state, a long period w ithout a larg e event do es not imply that one is due 
soon.  T here is such a com plex in terdependence am ong all the elem ents of a system  that it cannot 
be known w hether sm all events are re lieving or increas ing stress.   
The following extended exam ple84 illustrates th e inte rplay of  stresses in a h ighly in teractive and 
interconnected large scale inf ormation system , how they can lead to catastrophic failure, and 
possible m itigation techniques.   
Example:  T he possibility  of larg e-scale failures in info rmation systems is  an especially 
important problem domain for three reasons.   
• Information in th e information systems involve both  new technology and new 
institutional arrangem ents which have not existed long enough for the development of 
a good empirical foundati on for risk assessm ent and management. 
• Information systems conti nually undergo majo r changes, so a good empirical 
foundation for risk assessme nt and management m ay never become available. 
• Vital econom ic and mi litary functions are highly dependent on these systems. 
Some types of failure in inform ation systems are well understood and easy to  design against.  
Others are m uch less und erstood and present subs tantial challenges.   
Independent failures are the simples t type.  T hese may be t hought of as local failures.  If a 
room is lit by four lamps a nd one goes out, it does not make the others fail any sooner than 
they otherw ise would and the othe rs continue to prov ide light.  A s this simple example 
illustrates, the pr imary m ethod of risk m anagement against independent  failures is to build 
                                                 
81 Bar, Per.  How Na ture Works:  The Science of Self-Orga nized Critica lity.  Ne w York, NY:  Springer-Verlag,  
1996.   
82 Self-org anized criticality  is th e ten dency of a syste m to stay n ear its critical state. 
83 The power law distribu tion is an im portant characteristic  of scale free networks whic h are as diverse as the 
World Wide Web, the  U.S.  Air T raffic Sys tem, the “acquaintance distance” betwe en any two people 
(popularize d in John Guarre’s Six Degrees  of Separation), and the molecular network in biological cells.  See, 
for example, the discussion in Barabasi ’s  Linked .   
84 Ibid., pp. 106–1 10. 
 5-28
redundancy into the system .  This can be seen in the mo re sophisticated example of an 
information  networ k in w hich reliable communication is assure d by routing traffic around a 
failed node.   
The s ituation  become s more difficult when local failures are not inde pendent.  Correlated 
shocks are failures that occur when elements of th e system tend to go down at  the same time 
for the same reaso n.  Fo r example , radio transmitters in an area would all likely fail at the 
same time d ue to the occu rrence of sunspots.  Typical solutions  involve b uilding new elem ents 
of the sys tem that are not susceptib le to th e same shocks, for example l andlines in the sunspot 
example.  Monocultures, such as  information systems that rely  on widespread use of com mon 
hardware and software components, are suscepti ble to computer viru ses and other virtual 
pests.  Heterogeneous computing environm ents may be more difficul t to man age for the  IT 
staff in an organization but they  can enable some knowledge wo rkers to con tinue company 
operations w hile others w ait to get their machines disinfected.85    
Independent and correlated failur es can both occur in  systems whether or  not the elements 
are connected to each other.  In our efforts to stabilize sy stems against independent or 
correlated failures we o ften transform them in to more  tightly coupled systems tha t redistrib ute 
stress.  An example is the U.S. electric al power grid system whic h allows regions to borrow 
power from each other to de al with local failures or shortages in capacity.   
Stress propagation failure becomes possible when  a syst em’s elements inte ract naturally or 
are designed to interact.  The  risk is that a fa ilure in one elemen t can cause stress in another 
element, leading to fail ure of that element, as well.  Eventually a cascade of failures could 
cause a l arge-scale failure, as shown by the 1977 blackout  in Ne w York City  or th e two 
outages of 1996 that affected millions of utili ty customers in the wester n United States show.   
Of course, systems are coupled for many other reasons beside s protecting against 
independent or corre lated failures.  One impo rtant reason is  efficien cy.  F or example, a just-
in-time inven tory system, which increases efficiency by reducing inventory buffers, means that 
a strike in a single plan t can rapidly close a whol e network of plants.   
Unless the basic coupled nature of a structure is ch anged, interventi ons to stave catastrophic 
events can o nly be expected to be  briefly effectiv e.  Short-term in terven tions a re not effective.  
The relative frequency of  big and small events (whether ea rthquakes or  power grid failures)  
stems from the nature of the interdependence be tween the elem ents.  It  is the linkages am ong 
the artifacts or agents th at give rise to even ts wh ich influ ence th e type and pro bability of 
future events.    
While the principles for syst ems that propagate stress are no t fully developed, ideas for 
mitigating stress tend to fall in one of three areas:   
                                                 
85 The Windows operating system for pe rsonal computers is targeted by hackers orders of magnitudes more 
often than the Apple operating system.   
 5-29
• The entire problem can be avoi ded if the elements of the sy stem can be pr evented from 
transferring stress to each  other.  This normally re quires a major redesign of a 
system. 
• Large stress failures can be prevented by  partitioning the syst em in a way that 
prevents load transfers fr om one part to another. 
• Build more slack into individu al elements o f the system so  that they fail les s often. 
All these m ethods work at some  cost in lost opportunities  for load sharing or other 
efficiencies. 
Organizing routines :  An other mechanism in whic h interactions within  the systems stim ulate 
further activation of agents is  the formation of work rou tines in o rganizations.  Work routines are 
recurring patterns of inte ractions am ong agents and artifacts.  The in teractions in a single routine 
may be quite  diverse because they  com bine the distinctive  skills of  multiple h uman agents.    
Examples:  A  simple exam ple is an automobile assembly lin e but many examples are less 
structured and formal.  A n intricate division of role s and responsibilities in  setting up a night 
bivouac can emerge amo ng a squad of soldiers who have been  patrolling with each other for 
months.  Families de velop sim ilar patterns of behavior w ith re spect to periodic  activities like 
making dinner, washing dish es, and mowing the lawn.   
Routines arise because in teractions am ong agents increase th e likelihood of late r repetitions of 
those sam e interactions .  Usually this happens  through learning by the pa rticipants.  They m ay 
becom e aware of a v alued resu lt from an ove rall rou tine in wh ich their actions played a part.   
Example:  A  systems engineer he ars that the sponsor he referr ed to another colleague a few  
days ear lier got exactly th e informa tion need ed and was pleased with the systems engineering 
team.  R eferrals in fu ture, similar  interactions  with a spon sor a re more likely to o ccur.   
Example:  A  systems engineer  going on vacation prepares a work summary and spends an 
hour discussing a work activity a colleague will take ov er for the next two weeks.  If when she 
returns  from vaca tion sh e finds tha t the work has continued smoothly during the interim she 
will be mo re like ly to u se the same handover mechanisms  for future absences.   
We normally do not give m uch atte ntion to how routines arise.  They are im portant sources of 
organized productivity.  P art of their value rests in accom plishing work while taking relatively 
little attentio n.  As a consequen ce rou tines are n oticed m ainly when they do not work, when they 
resist needed chang e, or when they execute inapp ropriately.   
The way routines form  is im portant  for organizations.  The easier it is to  create good ones and 
modify bad ones, the m ore product ive organization s can be.  P art of the su ccess enjoyed in the 
“quality” field has com e from  making linkages between events (or cau se and  effect) clearer to 
participan ts.  This m otivates the u se of routines and m akes them  easier to learn and im prove.  
Tracing a d efect to  its upstream  cause and fixing it at the source, rather tha n patching it lo cally, 
allows a ll participants to u nderstand the  interdependencies of a routine.  W hile it can be cos tly in 
 5-30
time or other resources to  put into operation, part icularly in the early st ages of  implem entation, 
this ap proach can reap large fu ture rew ards for the o rganization.86  It is the basi s of Toyota’s well-
deserved reputation for produci ng quality autom obiles.   
Looking at routines this  way, one can m ore easily envision devices for m aking the next st ep or the 
final re sult more visible to participants.  These  include feedb ack on week ly progress, and ev en 
procedures to highlight the absenc e of feedback or com plaint.   
It is im portan t to no te tha t all of  these examples of propagating stress  and of self -sustaining 
activity are about formation:  of the potentia l for large-scale fa ilures, of boundarie s, of recurring 
action  cycles .  They are less ab out the details of the observed structures an d more about how the 
structures arise.   
When we look for insights into harnessing com plexity we should ask how we change the pattern 
of sizes of large-s cale failu res, the shape and size of pa tches or other grouping s that form , or the 
number and com plexity of organizing routines that can be cr eated.  Note that these techniques do 
not n ecess arily g ive us co ntrol o ver specific even ts.  Instead, they help us find interventions that 
may affect th e averages  of what h appens, that may allow adaptation or learning, even without 
knowing in advance just wh at will change, or just  what will be learned. 
Restructuring of physical  and conceptual spaces :  In this mechanism the ac tions oc curring with in 
the sys tem alter the v ery structure of the spa ce in w hich the actors are located.  The agen ts are  not 
directly intent on changi ng the collective intera ction patterns, but barriers are being created or 
reduced f rom the inside, as a by -product of ag ent actions.   
The classical exam ple from  biology is speciation.  The anim als m ay have no intention to form  a 
separate species, but their breeding decisions eventu ally have that result.  Biological exam ples of 
mergers are less comm on but they  do o ccur.   
In the social world w e see m erging and division of gr oups and even nations.  At the level of 
national politics such processe s always have an exp licit com ponent.  New nations declare their 
independence.  Foreign gove rnments recogn ize their existence.  But f requently this is a la te stage 
of what began as a m ore im plicit and internally driven separation proces s.  A group of people 
considered as part of some larg er population find th emselves interacting m ore strongly with each 
other and less with m embers of an other grouping.  They ta lk of their separate  identity and this 
may lead them  into a new dynam ic that results in their separation from  the la rger population.  An 
exam ple on the national leve l is th e peaceful d ivision of C zechoslovakia in to the Czech Republic 
and Slovakia in 1993.  Of course, this restructuring of spaces can play out at m uch smaller 
organizational  levels.   
 
                                                 
86 “Peo ple [in an organization] usually know some – but not all – [work process]  dependencies an d making 
them clear th rough activ ity map s, for instanc e, can dram atically im prove t he efficie ncy and e ffective ness of a 
process .”  (Malone , Thomas W., The Future of Work.  Harvard Business School Pres s.  20 04, p. 141.) 
 5-31
5.5.4 Summary 
There are num erous m ethods, rules an d strategies for shap ing interaction pattern s.  In turn, these 
interaction patterns am ong agents shape the creation and destruc tion of variety and produces the 
events that d rive attribu tion of credit.  Next we exa mine how se lection  itself works and h ow it 
feeds b ack o nto variety and in teraction. 
5.6 Selection87 
To th is point the dis cussion has been o n mechanism s that create  and destroy types and processes 
and structures that gove rn interaction am ong agents.  The di scussion now turns to how selection 
can b e employed to p romote ad aptation.  This invol ves m aking decisions on w hich agents or 
strategies should be proliferated and which elim inated. 
If one wants to design a system  that is able to exp lore new pos sibilities while being able to exploit 
what h as already been ach ieved, biological evo lution provides an im portant benchm ark.  Of 
course, selection in a com plex so cial s ystem need n ot operate in  the sam e way as evolutionary 
biology.  But, natural selection pr ovides a well-studied and fam iliar exam ple of how selection can 
work.  It re quires three things. 
• A means to retain th e essential ch aracter of the agent.  In biolog ical sys tems genetic 
material pres erves the key patterns. 
• A source of variation.  In sim ple biological system s this can be achieved by m utation.  In 
sexual reproduction, novel ty is generated thr ough recom bination of characteristics from  
parents and m utation. 
• Amplification or chan ges in the frequencies of types.  In bi ological sys tems this is th e 
result of som e individual s having m any offspring while others have few or none. 
Interestingly, biologic al evolution dem onstrates that adaptation can be ach ieved without agents or 
anyone else having an y understanding of how the system  work s.  This has im plications for hum an 
social systems.  They, t oo, evolve w ith or withou t purposeful intervention. 
Com pared to m ore directed m ethods of  achievi ng adaptation, natural sele ction has disadvantages 
since it occurs at th e level of the agen t.  Whenever  it is f easible to  attribute success  to something 
more specific th an an en tire agen t, there is th e possibility of selecting stra tegies, ra ther than whole  
agents.88  
Example:  K nowing that  quinine-related compounds  reduce malaria allows a strategy of 
spreading them through the world instead of waiting many gene rations for natu ral selection 
                                                 
87 Ibid., pp. 117–1 51. 
88 Recall that agents have  strat egies.  For e xample, an  employee hel ps a co-worker in the hopes that the latter 
will recip rocate; someone needing a loan ask s a friend  to help ; a nation seek ing to pro mote favo rable norm s 
leads by exam ple. 
 5-32
to breed malaria-resistant human s, particularly sin ce the ma in anti-malarial solution na ture 
makes the ca rrier suscep tible to sickle -cell d isease.89   
When attribution is sufficiently precise it can be advantageous to  make num erous copies of  a good 
strategy in a shor t time that wou ld be difficult, costly, o r perhaps even im possible if com plete 
agents had to be reproduced.  Agen t selection and strategy selection share the ne ed to m ake copies 
that retain effective adaptations, to inc orporate variation for further adapta tion, and to am plify the 
success and cull the failures that  do occur.  But the two m ethods di ffer at the level at which they 
operate – and selection at  the two le vels can wo rk very differently.   
Example:  Selection of one contractor from a population of com peting fi rms ( agent selection)  
can have quite different dynamic s from selecting am ong a popula tion of technical approaches 
proposed by a single contract or (strategy selection) .   
The v iew ad vocated here is on e in which tradeoffs are m ade in an evolutionary context and 
considers factors like innovation ve rsus exploitation and variety vers us uniform ity.  Note that th e 
tradeoffs m ay go beyond concerns surrounding the imm ediate decisi on (technical approach for a 
particular project, in the a bove exam ple).  F or exam ple, de pending on the i mmediate decision, 
there m ay be im plications concer ning the survival or  extinction of contra ctors and, hence, the 
variety of them  available to do si milar projects in th e future.   
A design for an adaptive system  of se lection m ust addres s four issues:   
• Defining suc cess cr iteria 
• Determining lev el of selection (agents or strategies) 
• Attribu tion o f credit (for success or failure) 
• Creating new  agen ts or strategies 
In application, these design issues do not necessaril y separate neatly in to four distinct factors.   
5.6.1 Defining Success Criteria   
The im portance of defining succ ess appropriatel y is the essence of the following story. 
Example:  A fter standing in a long line with fellow draftees to wash and rinse their dinner 
plates a recruit (who was an opera tions analyst in civi lian life)  approached his drill sergeant 
to explain that it is in efficient to use tw o vats for washing dishes and two for rinsing them.  
Since wash ing takes mo re time  than rinsing, he explaine d, it would be faster  to use th ree vats 
for washing and one for ri nsing.  The drill sergea nt looked at the recr uit incredulously and 
said, “You have it exactly backwar ds.  I can’t keep the platoon running all day but the longer 
                                                 
89 Ibid., p. 118. 
 5-33
I keep you on your feet the bett er it is for your physical cond itioning.  I want you to stand as 
much as possible.” 90   
Selection of agents or st rategies im plies som e metric of succe ss.  In m ost situ ations perform ance 
measures are activ e in the m inds of designers, policy m akers and other stakeholders  whether they 
are acting in the system  or contem plating it from  the outside.  In  Linux software de velopm ent, the 
thousands of individual s proposing solutions to specific ope rating system  problem s know that 
speed  and stability are critical success cr iteria for  new ver sions of the operating system .  
Typically, however, th e assessm ent of altern atives in a com plex social sys tem is no t easy:  there is 
usually m ore than one criterion that  can and should be used to as sess resu lts and som e may even 
be viewed as being in c onflict with eac h oth er.   
For a business, profit seem s a na tural m easure of s uccess.  For a ch eckers player, win ning gam es 
is a natu ral perform ance m easure.  Yet, even in the se simple examples, with a criterion th at seem s 
indisputable, com plexity m ight be harnessed m ore effectively if othe r success m easures are used.   
In a bus iness , market share pro vides an  additiona l measure that can be a useful supplement to 
profits.  Changes in profits m ay reflect factors beyond th e control of a com pany, such as a change 
in national econom y.  Attributing cr edit (or blam e) for a change in profits to a new m arketing 
campaign m ay be the wrong inferenc e in a national econom y in whic h an entire i ndustry either 
flourished or didn’t.  An increase in m arket sh are could provide a better indication than  profits of 
whether a com pany was doing som ething right and wh at it w as.   
There are m easures of success  that may be m ore effective th an waiting for the outcom e of an 
event.  Th ese will be discussed later. 
The view taken in t his report is that perform ance m easures ar e instrum ents for shaping which 
events are lik ely to o ccur in a com plex social system.  W hile perf ormance measures are clearly 
importan t, they are not absolute and un chang eable.  Nor is the attainm ent of any m easure, per se , 
generally the high est goal.  Goal se tting is an  intervention technique th at creates perform ance 
criteria that gove rn the processes of selection.   
In com plex social sys tems perfo rmance m easures  are largely defined, m odified (or m aintained) 
and ap plied  (or d isregarded) by th e agents them selves.  W hile this is not a surprise to m any 
experienced m anagers, it is striki ng ho w little exp licit attention is given to this within  a social 
system  like an enterprise.   
Example:  C onsider the case of profit.  What counts as pr ofit depends on many factors, 
including laws, what tax codes recognize as legitim ate costs,  what so ciety’s norms define as 
“fair” and w hether actual practi ces conform to those norms, and  whether society charges for 
disposal of byproducts of revenue-producing activi ties (e.g., used motor oil).  Societies even 
regulate whether or not profit is  a permissible goal in systems.  For in stanc e, in the ear ly 20th 
century Ame rica largely removed profit as a permissible goal  from social systems like 
                                                 
90 Ibid., pp. 119–1 20. 
 5-34
schools, hospitals, and pris ons.  There has been exp erime ntation with it in  all three se ctors in 
recent yea rs to add ress flaws tha t have been seen in the performanc e of these institutions in 
their core missio ns. 91  
A further consequence of perform ance m easures being defined by th e agents them selves  is that 
there can be m ore than on e measure activ e and th e measures m ay be incons istent and change over 
time.  Change seen as an im provem ent by one type  of agent m ay be viewed  as a loss by others.  
There are is sues in v ariety in performance m easures just as there are in oth er characteristics of 
agents and th eir strategies.    
The way in which success is defi ned affects the chances fo r effe ctive learn ing.  Cons ider the 
difficulties in learning che ckers if the sole criterion of success is winning.  The central problem is 
that victory or defeat com es only once per gam e.  Getting m ore than on e measurem ent of 
perform ance per gam e could dram atically  improve the rate of adaptation.   
The typical way to do this is to use intermediate criteria tha t can be m easured in the course of the 
game.  In checkers or chess this  is possible by ev aluating the current board to see who is ah ead in 
pieces and aspects of pos ition.  T his kind of evaluation allows intelligent choices in the m iddle of 
the gam e based on what prom ises to lead to a better board posit ion in a few m oves.  Since one 
canno t precisely m easure the con sequences of earl y moves for an ultim ate vi ctory, the  tack is to 
introduce m etrics that are m ore easily pred icted.  Although it m ay appear som ewhat 
counterintuitive, the chan ces of winn ing are incr eased by concentrating on  criteria that do not 
explic itly in clude winning.   
The us e of intermediate c riteria is evo cative of  build -a-little, tes t-a-little  incremental sy stem 
acquisition in which a focus on de veloping intermediate capabiliti es more readily le ads to  the 
successful deploym ent of a full capability.  But in cremental sy stem developm ents are usually 
concerned with the u ltimate goal of successfully fi elding the full capability  of a spe cific sys tem 
and rarely put a spotlight on lear ning to im prove interm ediate pe rformance c riteria for future 
developm ents of other system s.  In the following exam ple, consid er how this pers pective, if 
adopted at an  enterp rise level, could evolve  improved enterprise ac quisition processes.   
Example:  In checkers,  one can learn to im prove the criteria by which o ne evalua tes 
intermediate board positions.  For example, having many piec es in the center of the board 
often leads to good result s a few moves later.  This sugge sts a strategy that focuses on 
dominating the center of the board early in the gam e.   
But how does one learn these kinds  of strategies and t hen improve on them?  When arriving at 
a board position that subsequent ly proves to be surprising ly good (or bad) , there is the 
opportunity to use this in formation to refine exis ting success criteria.  In  the future, the player 
can exploit the refined criteria to drive toward s even better inter mediate board pos itions.  A 
long-term co nsequ ence o f this type of learning is that the player accumulates a store of well-
                                                 
91 Ibid., p. 121. 
 5-35
developed criteria for a ttributing value to a va riety of board positions and thus evolves to a 
high sk ill lev el.92   
It is comm on in system  acquisiti ons to use interm ediate measurements to g ive insight into 
questions such as “is the progr am on course” and if not “what are we doing wrong and how  do we 
correct it.”  I t is less comm on that the interm ediate m easurem ents are s crutinized with a v iew 
towards ask ing whether the criteria u sed accu rately predict success and how  they can be im proved 
for fut ure use.   
This approach a nd technique for learning to im prove perfor mance criteria are of  broad 
applicab ility.  They can be  summ arized  as follows :93
• When succes s is measured  rarely, n ew measures  taken more freq uently can sp eed learn ing 
even if th e measures do n ot perfectl y reflect the lon ger-term  goal.   
• Whenever o utcom es are better o r worse than expected, the experience can help rev ise the 
criteria so that, in the future, the attribution of cred it will produce m ore accurate results.   
The above discussion is not intended to recomm end this app roach in a ll circum stances  or to the 
exclusion of other consid eratio ns.  If th e challeng es a pro gram manag er are faci ng are long-term  
or widespread in the organization, f ine-grain and im mediate measures of success m ay work 
against m uch needed exploration.  The challenge for th e organization and its leadership is to 
develop m easures of success th at prom ote learning by fine-grained and frequent feedback and 
appropriate levels of e xploratory behavior.   
Care m ust be taken in using indi rect m easures of success to gu ide action and learning.  A measure 
may be correlated w ith results that m atter with out being caus ally r elated as suggested by the 
familiar relationsh ip am ong fever, d isease and  aspirin.  Asp irin can re duce the fever witho ut 
affecting the disease and m ay even be harm ful if elevated te mperature is part of the body’s way of 
fighting the disease.   
Taken as a w hole, these observatio ns about criteria for success im ply rich possi bilities (and risks) 
for harnessing com plexity by shapi ng the criteria by which agents or  their activitie s are eva luated.  
Which m easures are used profound ly affects which agents and st rategies will be copied and 
combined an d what adaptation will occur.  This is what gives such power  to what seem  modest 
chang es in m easures, su ch as introd ucing on-tim e perform ance in to airline  regulation94 and 
portfolio risk into financial m anagem ent.95
Example:  T he core m ission of  public libra ries is to prov ide in formation  to their patrons. 
Libra ries typ ically trac k circulation statistics  as ind icators of institutiona l success in this 
                                                 
92 Ibid., p. 122. 
93 Cohen, Michael D. a nd Robert Axelrod.  “Coping with Complexity:  The Adaptive Value of Changing 
Utility.”  Amer ican Economic  Review 74  (1984); pp. 30–42.   
94 Gartner, Sc ott S. Strate gic As sessme nt in W ar.  New Ha ven, CT.:  Yale Uni versity  Press, 19 97. 
95 Sharpe, William  F. et.  al.  Investments .  Eng lewood Cliffs, NJ:  Pren tice Hall, 6th ed., 1998. 
 5-36
mission. The circulati on statistics of the Washington (fictitious name)  Town Library had 
steadily risen every month over th e past two years.  As  at all libraries this  increase in dem and 
was viewed as good news.  So, it ca me as a surprise when the to wn voted not to approve an 
override to increa se libra ry fund ing (a nd staffing level)  the following year.   
The library director reasoned that the library had not yet reached the right circulation 
threshold and if they did that in the ens uing mon ths the to wn would “see the light” and 
approve the override next year.  The circulation indeed continued to increase but , much to the 
surprise and dismay of the libr ary director and the overworked staff, th e override again failed 
to pass.   
The director held an all-hands meeting with the library staff to discuss why demand continued 
to grow but did not tran slate into support for add itional funding to incr ease ca pacity to m eet 
that demand.  This is a form of the questio n, “wha t predicted the  surprise?”  T he staff 
member who  kept the circ ulation statistics no ted that of the 60 percent of  town residents, w ho 
were library cardholders, 40 percent w ere occa sional users and onl y 20 percent w ere 
“power” users.  Further, the increase in circulation demand had been coming predom inantly 
from the power users who understo od and exploited the library’s excellent capabilities.  The 
reason for the failed overri des became clear:  20 percen t of the town population was 
insufficient s upport.  What was needed was not higher circulatio n numbers, per se, but a 
different distribution of existin g circulation and bro ader awareness of th e value the library 
brought to the community.   
The library mounted an inform ation campaign aim ed at educ ating the occasional and non-
user about library servic es and their importance to  the intellectual li fe of the community, 
particularly to school- aged children.  De mand increased slightly duri ng the following year, as 
did the number of patrons.  Appr eciation of th e imp ortance of th e libra ry to town life grew.  
The overr ide to incr ease library funding ultimately passed.  
To see th e intricate interacti ons w ithin and am ong m ultiple pop ulations of agents an d their 
potentially profound effect on the definition of success in  a com plex system , consider an award 
system  that recogn izes, rewards,  encourages, and defines excellence in an area of hum an 
endeavor.  T he area can be any f rom a range of  possibilities that are relevant to a com plex 
enterprise.  E xamples include be st technical paper awar ds; departm ent, direct or, or presidential 
awards for individual or team  perform ance in a business unit; cu stomer support awards; and the 
prom otion or appointm ent of indivi duals to pr estigious positions or ranks in  an organization.   
Traditionally, we think of awards as being exem plars and m otivators of good perform ance and 
they certainly are.  Bu t the im portance of awards  and recognitions in a compl ex soci al system 
stems, in large part,  from their utility in changing  success criteria to ones that are differ ent from 
curren t standards.  Therefore, aw ards or recognit ions based on subjective criteria are of most  
interest.  In these situations it  is usual that a “judge ” or “panel of judges” m akes assessm ents of 
quality.  The term  “judge” is m eant broadly.  Ex amples include a sen ior techn ical directo r 
recognizing a project team  for suc cess or a board of dire ctors electing a new  corporate of ficer.   
 5-37
A direct effect of an awar d is to re cognize or reward an individual or team .  An i ndirect effect  is 
that it provides a m odel for othe rs to em ulate.  This helps sh ape the percep tion of what is 
important to the individual’s or team ’s peers within an  organization.   
Example:  A  project team r ecognized for a small success in  a technology ar ea new to a 
corporation sends a signal  to others that growth  in the new area is strategically important, 
valued, and will be rewarded.   
Example:  T he election of a new corporate officer w ith a distin guished record of forging new 
business in a company that  has a legacy of affili ation with one major cl ient signals increased 
value in an a bility to e xpand the client base.   
Both these exam ples show how awards can redef ine success w ithin an or ganization.  The goal in 
each instance is to p rovoke additional innovativ e exemplars of th e new v alues.   
The effect of  awards can be even m ore wi despread, extend ing beyond the organization.   
Example:  O rganizational awards  or appointments that are made known outside of the 
company provide signals to curr ent and potential clie nts about w hat the or ganization values.  
The promotion of a knowledgeable client base, in turn, can help create a mar ket or increa se 
demand for the service or product th e organization provides.   
Awards tha t are made for explic it com petition s (e.g., best proposal for rapi d prototyping idea that 
works in partnership with ex isting program s for a client) can engender useful variety by 
identifying and prom oting new an d valuable ideas.  When such an award is m ade it tends to 
legitim ate and prom ote the entire f ield or genre of the winner.  F rom the pe rspective of the winn er 
having an idea chosen is a form  of selec tion in which  the winn er’s intellectual offspring su rvive 
for further developm ent.   
But there is a tension.  Dec iding who or  what  should win requires the appl ication of standards of 
excellence.  The judges i nvariably use standards th at are shaped in part by the broade r community 
of which they are a part.  And judg es are u sually selected  on the basis of thei r own standing in the 
comm unity which, in tu rn, is often based on their adherence to cu rrent s tandards.  Even if the 
judges wish to be leaders in the identification  of what is n ew and worthy, they  risk looking 
arbitrary or f oolish.  So the judge s are also judged and th ey face the tension of  a trade-off between 
a safe cho ice that reflects curren t standards (exp loitation ) and  a bold cho ice that can tran sform  the 
standards (ex ploration).   
Although it m ay appear count erintuitive awards can even stifle variety, as  the following exam ple 
illustrates. 
Example:  O ne can  view a succes sion of incr easingly responsible posit ions within a comp any 
as a set of rewards leading to the ultimate rewar d of being elected CEO.   If the corporate 
culture is one that ack nowledges certain jobs as  tickets to be punche d along the way to the 
top, then this can be the dominant focus of wo uld-be CEOs.  The populat ion of CEO aspirants 
in a compan y can cr eate for them selves astonishingly simila r career p aths with th e result that 
 5-38
the pool of likely CEO ca ndidates has diminished variety.  Examples of this phenomenon 
abound as can be seen by  considering the pre ponderance of A ir Force Chiefs of Staff who 
were rated pilots in their career.   
While each award sets up a com petition am ong those as piring to win it, th ere m ay also be a 
competition am ong the aw ards them selves.   
Example:  Is being the en gineering staff direct or of portfolio A  better th an that of po rtfolio B?  
Put another way, which will accr ue more “credit” to its incumbent?  Ther e may b e a view in 
an organization of which portfolio has greater st atus based on the histor ical impor tance of the 
portfolio to company success.  But that can change if an incumbent of a less important 
portfolio goes on to ac hieve a more prestigious posit ion w ithin the compa ny.   
Thus, aw ards in a com plex social system  create an  intricate set of intera ctions within and am ong 
different populations of agents:  award  seek ers, their peers, judg es, the aw ards themselve s, and 
even p otential com pany clien ts.   
5.6.2 Determ ining Level of S election 
The process of sele ction prom otes adap tation by amplif ying suc cess at th e level of the agent o r of 
strategy.  Selection at the two levels can work in very di fferent ways.  T he form er makes an 
entirely new agent without the need to determ ine or know the caus e of success.  Th e latter creates 
new strategies from  an existing agent, which frequently requires an explicit decision about what 
strategy or part of the agent wa s respo nsible for success.   
5.6.2.1  Selection of Agents 
If an em ployee leaves a com pany another pers on fills the vacancy.  Those who select the 
successor m ust pick one candidate or another.  They are not ab le to pick and choose am ong the 
featu res they prefer from  a group of candidates.  This provides a stra ightforward basis for 
answering the questi on of what should be gi ven cr edit for success in being appointed to the  
position.  T he answ er is the whol e candidate.  As m uch as thos e who select the successor m ight 
want to ascribe cred it and  blam e sep arately fo r a candid ate’s experiences or character traits, th e 
decision requires select ion at the level o f the entire agent.   
Filling positions in a com pany is an exam ple of co-evolution in wh ich both kinds of  selection are 
playing out.  Those who appoint are selecting at the level of agents.  Active candidates are 
selecting at the level of strate gies by observing attributes of recent appointees and adopting or 
moving towa rds tho se attributes themselves (e.g ., by increasing skills in  important attributes 
through training or experien ce) in an attem pt to m ake them selves m ore com petitive for future 
openings.   
Agent selection can ope rate at m any dif ferent scales.  The ec onom y can be viewed as selecting at 
the le vel of companies (so me flourish, others go bankrupt) a nd even whole bu siness sectors 
(airline tr avel suffered in the post 9-11 period while tr avel by personal autom obile increased).   
 5-39
Example:  Imagine a co mpany that has a highly successful branch office.  T he company might 
use its earnings to  reprod uce the successfu l branch office in a w ay that duplicates its entire 
operation, as far as possible.  If branches op erate fairly autonomously , this w ould amount to 
creating a new agent.  Th e company w ould have gi ven credit to a n entire branch (instead of 
any of its particular strategies or  characteristics)  and us ed it to amplify su ccess by duplicating 
it.96   
Agent selection usually requires a substantial ac cumulation of resources to cr eate and proliferate 
new agents.  As will be seen, this contrasts with strategy -level selection  where the m arginal cos ts 
of producing new copies m ay literally be alm ost zero (e .g., softw are algorithms).   
Selection pressures  in a com plex social system  are an im porta nt factor in decidi ng on the utility of 
selection at the level of agents.  A high selection pre ssure produces a str ong tendency for a sm all 
number of the very best agents in a population to be copied  while others are copied  very little if at 
all.  A weak selection pressure produce s a slight tendency for better agents to be copied m ore and 
thus pro vides some amplification to populations of agents w ho are s omewhat or relatively 
successful.  So, a strong selection pressure exploits success quickly but it can also destroy variety 
in a population that can be used to explore for even better results in  the future.   
Selection pressures at the scale of the world econom y cannot be ea sily influenced.  W ithin an 
organization, however, m anagers and individuals may have the opportunity  to change them .   
Example:  A wards and recognit ions for “top performers” in an organization c an usually be 
adjusted so that more or fewe r top performers are recognized.  Recognitions that involve 
monetary aw ards are particularly  flexible sin ce their fr equency and the amount of the awards 
can be easily adjusted, even within a fixed bu dget.  On the other e nd, “zero-tolerance”  of 
underperforming agents or  artifacts reduces vari ety and favors exploitatio n over exploration.  
This is th e familiar tra de-off be tween  exploiting that which is best cu rrently a nd main taining 
variety to e xplore for po ssible future improveme nts.   
The perspective being put forth here is one that advocates ne ither strong nor w eak selection 
pressu res, per se , but rather a view which recognizes the role of va riety in a population and 
harnesses selection  pressu res to secure their advantages. 
5.6.2.2  Selection of Strategies 
Strategy selection  proliferates particular strategies o r com binations of multiple strategies.  In this 
section strategy se lection  will be discussed by expl oring how it differs f rom agent selection  in 
three key attr ibutes:  cos t, waiti ng tim e and difficulty of inference.   The different strengths of the 
two leve ls of selection are sometimes complementary and there can be advantages to a hyb rid 
system  of selection .   
                                                 
96 Ibid., p. 129. 
 5-40
If success can be assigned to a st rategy ra ther than a n agen t the cost of proliferating the strategy 
can be substantially lower than  that of acquiring whole agents .  Ass embling or  acquiring a new 
agent (person, business unit or a new governm ent organi zation) is typically more costly than 
copying a successful  strategy used by  the ag ent.   
Example:  T he manager of a sy stems engineering organization can attempt to hire “star”  
quality talent from outside the co mpany.  But if the reason the ou tside talent is successful is 
because of expertise in new te chnologies or systems engineeri ng processes it might be less 
costly to train enginee rs already on board.   
Whether this is a prom ising ap proach or not depends on how r eadily the new te chnologies or 
processes can be learned.  Are the re educational resources for hire with su ccess in teach ing these 
skills ?  Do es success  really  depend less on the new skills, per se , and m ore on the interaction and 
integration of the new skills with existing sk ills le arned v ia previous education and work 
experiences?  Then it m ay be ne cessary  to pay the co st of hiring a system s engineer with the entire 
complement of successfully  integrated skills.   
A secon d difference that often o ccurs between s trategy and agent level select ion is waiting tim e.  
This can be thought of as an instance o f higher costs  (recal ling the fam iliar ad age “tim e is 
money”) but even if the di rect cos ts of agen t copying were affo rdable the ind irect con sequences of 
delay m ight not be.   
Example:  C ompany A m ay have a proprietary process for certifying its engineering work 
force.  It might be quite val uable and plausible for company B  to develop its own engineering 
competency model and certificati on process.  It would result in company B  having a model 
and process that is tailored to its cult ure and “brand” of engineering.  But if a potential client 
is demand ing a form of ce rtification as  a condition of contracting with compan y B ther e is the 
risk of losing or delaying the contract.  Company B may ch ose to license the company A 
certifica tion process, in essen ce copying its strategy, not becaus e of lower m onetary costs but 
becau se of the value of ela psed tim e.   
Although selection at the level of strategy is typi cally faster and less cos tly these differences are 
tendencies rather than in evitable cons equences as the following exam ple show s. 
Example:  A  company aske d by a existing client to  take on a new contract  with its unique set 
of stakeholders and technology i ssues may find it more advantag eous to create a new division 
or a small spin-off firm to support the contract ra ther than modifyin g existing operations, 
activities and organ izations to do so .97   
A third d ifference between selection at the  two lev els is the  difficulty in inf erring exactly what is 
to be copied.  This diffi culty occurs at both levels but t here is one im portant difference between 
the two.  W hole agen ts may be thought of as a collection of strategies .  Successful agents 
generally em ploy a set of  strategies that are internally com patible.  If selection is made at the leve l 
                                                 
97 Ibid., p. 133. 
 5-41
of the agent the interact ions am ong the strategies do not need to be understood.  Strategy level 
selection generally requires m ore precise inferences.  How m any of an agent’s activity patterns 
and which ones m ust be copied to duplicate success?   Agent le vel selection gene rally preserves 
contex t better and  this can be an  advantage in complex so cial sys tems where m any resu lts derive 
from interactions am ong m ultiple effect s that are n ot fully u nders tood.   
The tende ncies for selection a t the agent level are to be m ore costly, sl ower, and m ore context 
preservin g.  The first two  tendencies are often not wanted  whil e the last fr equently is.   This can 
form the basis of a trade-space among these factors for a m anager, policy m aker, or designer who 
has som e freedom  to influence levels of selection.   
Example:  Most examp les so fa r have involved se lection for positive  traits but there can be 
selection for negative ones.  For exam ple consider technol ogy currency among the population 
of professional staff in  a company that provides a technica lly sophisticated consulting service 
to its clients.  For individu als who  are not keep ing curren t, select ion a t the level o f strategy 
may correspond to low perform ance ratings and low or no pay raises.  This does not rem ove 
the staff from  the population (a lthough some may choos e to leave of thei r own accord)  and it 
gives the individual tim e to reacquire technical currency  through education or new 
assignments.  On the other hand st aff (as agents)  could be negati vely selected in response to 
their los s of techn ical curr ency by b eing recla ssified to a lower pay grad e or even term inated.  
This form o f selec tion will make s taff with  low technical currency less like ly to be cop ied or 
proliferated in the population.  Of course, removing an indivi dual from the population and 
replacing the individual typically costs more and takes longe r than changing the individual’s 
strategy provided  the individual is w illing to change strategy.   
Selection at the level of agen ts and selection  at the level of strategies have som ewhat 
complementary strengths.  Agen t selection often work s on longer tim e scal es.  It generally 
preserves variation and cont ext.  Strategy se lection is faster which is usua lly but not always better.  
Strategy selection is olates key patt erns that can be more easily copied .  Thus, one is led to 
consider hyb rid systems where selec tion operates at both levels in a single population of agents.   
Example:  It is common for many companies to ev olve the quality of thei r technical staff by a 
combination of acti vities that  select  at both the agent and strategy  levels.  Evolution of 
technica l currency for employees  is ac hieved thr ough stra tegy level selection which  focuses 
on providing in-house technolog y refresher courses and by su bsidizing technical courses 
taken at local universities.  Agent level selection occurs primarily through hiring highly 
qualified technically st aff to fill vacancie s as they occur.   
The com plementary n ature of the two lev els of selection and the observation about hybrid 
selection system s suggest a strate gy that diversifies selection proc esses to achieve a m ix of fast 
and slow ones when there is  the poss ibility to do  so. 
 5-42
5.6.3 Attribution  of Credit 
Attribution of credit is the proc ess by which an agent us es a perf ormance crite rion to inc rease the  
frequency of successful  strategies or decrease the fre quency of unsuccessful ones.   
Attribu ting cred it correctly is di fficult and p rone to m istakes .  Large p ortions of acad emia (e.g. , 
logic, statistics, scienc e) and governm ent system s (e.g., professional review boards, courts of law) 
are devoted to im proving the exte nt to which conclusi ons follow from  prem ises and ev idence.  
These can  all be v iewed  as con tributing to im proving the perform ance in cr edit attribution that 
drives im portant selection proc esses in our ci vilization.   
The resu lts of a survey of facto rs which m ake it easy to learn lessons fr om experien ce in d ecision 
making contrasts starkly w ith the properties of a complex social system .  These are summarized in  
Table 5-2 below. 98
 
Table 5-2.  Decision Making Factors Versus Situations                                                
in a Complex Social System 
 
Factors that Enable Lesson Learn ing in 
Attributing Credit Situation in a Comp lex Social System 
Clear reward s for appro priate cho ices. Difficult to d etermine wh at shou ld be 
rewarded or which ch oice is appropriate. 
Repeated opportunities  for observation or 
practice. Infreq uent measurements of success.  S hifting 
context m akes few obser vations com parable.  
Small delib eration cos ts for each cho ice.  
Frequ ent cho ices becom e easier.   Deliberation costs b ecome i ncreasingly 
higher (scientific p eer reviews, legal 
proceedings).   
Good feedback on results of choices.  Feedback is am biguous, even conflicting.   
Unchang ing circum stances th at keep 
inferences valid. Circum stances an d goals chang e 
continuously. 
A sim ple context that can be e asily ana lyzed. Com plicated, changing context.   
 
There are n umerous exam ples that illustrate the attribution of cred it and its limits.   
Example:  L essons were lear ned by the American military in the Vietnam War.  These 
includ e the need for decis ive force in a ny futu re wa r, the need to avoid slow escalation, 
                                                 
98 Con lisk, John .  “Wh y Bounded  Ration ality.”  Journal of Economic Literatu re 34 (1996):  pp. 669 –700.   
 5-43
and the need to avoid civilian interference in the conduct of  war.  These lessons were 
turned into strategies a nd applied to the planni ng and conduct of the Gulf War with 
apparent success.99
Example:  T he lesson the Sov iet Unio n learned from the Vietnam War was that their 
North V ietnamese allies w on because of their great wi ll and courage, assisted by 
military aid from the Communi st world.  These lessons di d not warn th e Soviets about 
their later intervention an d ultima te failure in Afghanistan.100   
Example: Consider the proj ect manager who grow s a new business area, is promoted 
and singled out to be em ulate d.  Years later more  careful analysis ma y show that the 
business area led the com pany down an ultimately unfru itful road and h ad actually 
diverted resources and intellec tual capital from other, mo re promising work areas.  
The bus iness literature is r eplete with stories of perform ance indi cators tha t failed to ca pture 
important aspects of the com plexity of an attribution of credit  situation.  W hat follows are 
suggestions on how the side effects of inevitable m istakes  of attribution can be  turned, in part, to 
an adv antage.   
The first ty pe of m istake is  crediting (or blam ing) a part when a la rger ensem ble is responsible.  
This is com mon in com plex social system s since they so often involve a num ber of entangled 
causal factors.   
Example:  It is easy for a department or project manager to notice when a single agent 
or strategy is associated with  a series of su ccesses or fa ilures.  If the manager is not 
positioned to observe other forces he or sh e may r each the inc orrect conclusion tha t the 
agent (or strategy)  alone  caused the results.  In the case of an individual agent, the 
manager should consider fin ding a way that provides the manager a different 
obser vation persp ective o f the ag ent to includ e even  puttin g the a gent with another team 
to see wh ether success rea lly comes fro m the efforts of a single, pr omine nt individual or 
the interplay among the contributions of a number of team mem bers (i.e., group 
chemistry) .   
The second type of m istake is attributing cred it or b lame to on e ensem ble of factors  when a 
different ensem ble is responsible.  Diagnosis of cause in com plex, multi-causal situations is error 
prone.   
Example:  C onsider the problem  of examining customer or end-user complaints about a 
product malfunction or underp erform ance to discover de fects or potential design 
improvements.  Many com panies  and enterprises ha ve sophisticated sy stems that track 
problems from notification by  the customer or end-user  through trouble ticket 
                                                 
99 Powell, C olin L. My Americ an Journey . New Yo rk, NY . Random House. 1995. 
100 Zimmer man, William  and Robert Axelrod .  “The Lesso ns of Vietn am and Soviet Forei gn Policy.”  World 
Politics 34 (1981):  pp. 1–24.   
 5-44
generation, technical assistan ce assignment, and resolution.  This problem and tracking 
system construct is comm on across en terprises a s diverse as consumer product 
companies and military C 2 and weapon systems.   
It is natural to ask what can be learned from  the records of a problem and tracking 
system that would contribute to  product improvement.  C losing the loop on  this form o f 
organizational learning ha s often been more diffi cult than expected.   
An analyst w orking on a comm unication system problem mi ght hypothesize that since 
all th e customer repor ts on degraded voice quality of a particular military radio 
installed on a mobile command center occurred when traveling over dirt roads, shocks 
at a particular frequency may be causing an audio di sturbance.  A hypo thesis is usually 
tested by checking whether its conditions are sufficient to rep roduce the problem.  Many 
of thes e tests may fa il.  Fo r instance, someone from the radio product development 
company may subject th e unit to low -frequen cy vibrations and obse rve that it still 
performs well.  It may be t hat the complaint reports occu rred during the w inter and the 
problem arises only wh en the tempera ture is cold or  perha ps involves an  interaction 
between tem perature and vibration.  T his more subtle and detailed hypothesis may 
emerge only from a direct  dialog betw een the analyst and the front-li ne maintenance 
experts.   
What this suggests is that it may be beneficial for a company or enterprise to pay 
atten tion to the con tact patterns between its various organizat ions.  It may be immensely 
useful in resolving misa ttribution of credit.  The interac tions of new contacts may result 
in other information flowing between the organiza tions and this may generate new and 
useful combinations of ideas.    
The third type of error is a fail ure to appreciate the role of context.  Th is norm ally involves 
crediting a m isconstrued strategy, where actions actually  produced success, but the conditions in 
which the actions should be taken have been m isunderstood.  This type of m istake is especially 
comm on when selecting  at the le vel of strategies b ecause, unlik e agents, they norm ally do not 
preserve context and they often take the form  of conditional acti on patterns (e.g., if circum stances 
X and Y occur, then do Z ).  The difficulty com es from the fact that actions can be m uch easier to 
observe than the cond itions that gave rise to them .  Particularly  in com petitiv e situation s, an 
opponent m ay not be w illing to fully or accurately disclose the contex t of an action.   
Example:  When a player in  a chess game gives an opponent  the opportunity to take a 
key piece, it may not be easy to determine wh ether this is a blund er or a clever 
sacrifice.  Th e ultimate effect of th e move may not be clear for some time.   
Learning  proceeds slowly  in this type o f situation .  Efforts to  emulate apparen tly successfu l 
strategies will result in mistakes because m any factors dete rmine success (e.g., other subsequent 
chess board m oves) and knowledge a bout the conditional aspect of a particular strategy or m ove is 
limited.   
 5-45
A tack for dealing with this is along the lines of  the “defining success criteria” discussion and 
checkers exam ple of Section 5.6.1.  Surprises (actions that appare ntly produce a result different - 
better o r worse - th an exp ected ) can fu el im provement provided one can correlate fact ors that  
were observable or predictable in the short run with the surpri se.  The question becom es, “W hat 
observable criteria were often hi gh or low when the re sult was better or wo rse than ex pected ?”  
This is an impor tant shift from a focus on “wha t predicted the outcom e” to “w hat pre dicted the 
surprise,” i.e., the deviat ion of what occurred f rom what was ex pected.  It is a form  of the adage 
“we learn best (and quicke st) from  our m istakes.” 
5.6.4 Creating New  Agents or Strateg ies 
The fourth part of selection is  the creation of an existing agent or stra tegy through copying or 
recom bination or its destruction.  Many of the key points have be en m ade in the discussion on 
creating and destro ying variety.   
Notions of copying are central to creating or destroying agents  and strategies.  The aim  in 
discussing copying in general is to  guide designers and policy m akers to ask ques tions about how 
copies are made and how destruct ion happens for the ag ents an d strateg ies in the sy stems they 
work in.  There are m any different pro cesses that m ay be called copying.   
Agent copying require s material reso urces to b e assem bled.  Copies are m ade using the sam e 
materials as  those of th e copied ag ent.  Strate gy copying concentrates on the preservation of 
abstract form .  The fo rmer is akin to natural s election and the la tter shares s imilarities with 
copying of algorithm s, software or pr ocesses in com puter system s.   
Just as  the differences b etween copying strategies and agents m atter, so too d o the detailed 
differences am ong various copying processes.  Errors and recom bining processes depend on the 
details, and the ch aracter of the variation in th e system is shaped by them  in turn.   
Example:  Imitating an individua l’s method for making face-t o-face charity requests is 
very different from photocopyi ng and distributing fund-raising letters.   Both involve a  
form of copying, but the former requires an integrati on of a pattern into one’s own 
behaviors.101   
Making fund-raising calls using another’s m ethod is m ore akin to recom bining strategies than is 
photocopying and m ailing fund requests.  Scale matter s in copying, as well. 
Example: Setting an exam ple inte nded to trigger im itation as a form of copy ing  is very 
different when the populati on is a group of local work-mates t han it is when the population is 
comprised of various org anizational stakeholders in a comp lex enterpr ise (develop ers, users, 
contracting and engineering managem ent agencies, etc.)  each with their own and very 
differen t metrics for success.102
                                                 
101 Ibid., p. 147. 
102 Ibid., p. 147. 
 5-46
5.6.5 Summary 
The central question in selection is , “which agents or st rategies should be copi ed or destroyed?”  
Four aspects of selection have been exam ined:  criteria for su ccess, focus on  selection  at the level 
of agents or strategies, attr ibution of credit, and  mechanism s for creating n ew agents an d 
strateg ies.  The answer to the question is strongly intertwined with answers to two other m ajor 
questions: “what is the  right b alance between variety and unifor mity?” (va riation) and “what 
should interact w ith what  and when?” (interaction). 
 5-47
6 Application to an Enterprise 
Section 5 discussed a fram ewor k for harnessing com plexity in  a world with m any diverse, 
mutually adapting p layers, where the em erging futu re is difficult to p redict.  Increasingly, th ese 
are th e situations sy stems engineers f ind themselves  in.  T his section prov ides a brief summary of 
the id eas pr esented in S ections 2 through 5 and suggests how they m ight be a pplied in the design 
and evolution of im proved en terprise organi zations, strategies , and processes. 
A highly com pressed restatem ent of the va riation -interaction -selection fram ework show s how it 
forms a work ing who le.  Principle con cepts introduced in Section 5 are italicized.   
Agents , of a variety of types, use their strategies, in patterned interac tion, with each other and 
with artifacts .  Performan ce mea sures on the resulting events drive selection  of agen ts and /or 
strategies through proc esses of error-prone copying  and recomb ination , thus chang ing th e 
frequen cies of the type s within the  system .103
6.1 Purposeful Questions 
System s engineering has always been about asking good questions, answ ering them  and following 
their implications.   What follows is a series of ques tions that can help the systems engineer 
harness the complexity  of a particular sy stem or enterprise. 
6.1.1 Systems Th inking Questions 
• What is m y enterpris e?  What el ements of it d o I con trol?  W hat elem ents do I influence?  
What are the elem ents of m y environ ment th at I do not control or  influence but which 
influence m e?  
• How can a balance be achieved between optim izing at the  system level with e nabling th e 
broader enterprise, particular ly if it co mes at th e expense  of the smaller system? 
• How can analytic and synthetic perspectives be combine d in one view to en able alignment 
of purposes across the enterpri se?  W ould a change in perform ance at the subsystem  level 
result in a ch ange at th e enterpris e level?  If so, how, and is it important?  H ow would a 
new en terprise leve l requirement be  met a nd how w ould it inf luence system s below it? 
• How can the solu tion s pace of a seem ingly intractable problem  be expanded by view ing it 
in its containing whol e?   
• How can com plementary relations  in opposing tendencies be vi ewed to create feasible 
wholes with seem ingly unfeasib le parts?  How can they be  viewed as being separate, 
mutually in terdependent dimensions  that can interact and be in tegrated into an “and ” 
relationship?  
                                                 
103 Ibid., p. 151. 
 6-1
• Is interdependence of va riables in a  system or en terprise hidden by slack ?  Is the inab ility 
to make progress in one variab le except at the expens e of ot hers an indication that slack 
among them  is used up?   Can a redesign of the system  or enterprise rem ove 
interdependence o r provide add itional slack? 
6.1.2 Harnessing Complexity  Questions 
• What interv entions in a co mplex sys tem are likely  to bring it to a futu re we w ould prefer?  
How can variation be m anaged, interactions be shaped, and se lections be m ade to guide 
and accelerate im provem ent ov er tim e?  What is the rig ht balance between variety and 
uniform ity?  W hat (or who) sh ould interact with what (or who) and when?  W hat should 
be copied (or proliferated) a nd what should be elim inated?  
6.1.2.1  Variation 
• What is an  approp riate b alance between variety and uniform ity?   
• What processes of copying and recombining create and destroy the var iety of types in the 
enterp rise?  W hat additio nal processes m ight serve copyi ng and recom bining functions? 
• Can variety be created by com bining portions of  strategies or agents  already in use to 
introduce new types that have some degree of correlation wi th the en terprise’s other 
conditions?   
• Can variety be created by re laxing or  reversing assumptions about a problem  or a 
solution?   
• How do erro rs occur in c urrent processes?  Does the vari ety that res ults ever offer 
potential value?  
• Where and how can homogeneity be used?   Can hom ogeneity (e .g., convergence on a 
standard) be used to enable  innovation to flouri sh elsewhere in th e enterprise?    
• How can prem ature convergence be prevented? Are the type s available in  a population 
likely to be the be st possible?  Are enviro nmental conditions changing so that what is best 
now m ay not be best in  the near fu ture?   
• What is the right bala nce between exploration and exploitation?  Is exploration especially 
valuable because im provem ents ca n be widely applied or used for a long  time?  Is there a 
risk of disaster from  trying a bad strategy?  
• Will ex tinction elim inate from  a population a ty pe whose re placem ent may be lack ing a 
critical featu re of th e original?  Is the e nterprise operating und er the as sumption that all 
that is needed for an idea or solution to em erge are condi tions that will bring it rapidly to 
prom inence? 
 6-2
6.1.2.2  Interaction  
• What are events of inte rest whose likelihood should increase or decrease?  
• What are the current patterns of  interactions among types?   
• How can interaction of agents with e ach other and with ar tifacts be used to alter the 
likelihoo d of even ts of interest in a com plex system?  What (or who) should interact with 
what (or who ) and when ? 
• How is p roximity inf luencing inte ractions?   Can proxim ity be us ed to increase or  decrease 
the likelihood of interactions?  
• How does tim e scale affect the persp ective on p roximity? Is the  nature of a given 
population s haping which agen ts are attracted to it?  Will the nature of the po pulation b e 
shape d by n ew agen ts tha t join it?  W hat are th e dynamics of co-evolution?   
• Are ev ents of interest activ ated periodically or conditionally?   What are th e con sequences 
of chang ing an ev ent’s activ ation m echanism ?  Will it favor viability or  speed extin ction?   
• Are interaction patterns of an agent or type intense or diffuse ?  What are the consequen ces 
of chang ing the pa ttern?  Will it a lter an exploration -exploitation balanc e? 
• Can changes to an organization structure be used to m ake som e agents m ore proxim ate 
and others less?   Will the resu lting re-organization s hape the  interaction of  agents tow ards 
some ends or goals?    
• Can barriers to/enabler s of m ovem ent in tim e and physic al space be used to m ake som e 
agents m ore proxim ate and othe rs less?  Is the im precise selectivity of these m ethods 
acceptab le?   
• Can barriers to/enabler s of m ovem ent in conceptual spac e (e.g., sim ilarity  of technical 
expertise or organization al roles) be used to make some agents m ore prox imate and others 
less?  Can the resulti ng refined selectivity be  used to advantage?  Is the risk of under-
exploration accep table or address ed in som e other way ?   
• Is there a role for s emi-perm eable b arriers in shaping interactions?  Is the situ ation on e in 
which adm ission is governed by m omentary conditions or in whic h rules or cr iteria cannot 
easily cov er all circum stances th at may aris e?  Is the risk of possi ble m ismatch between 
the adm ission rules/criteria and th e long-term welfare of the sys tem or enterp rise 
acceptab le or addres sed in som e other way?  
• Have the implications of m echan isms that shorten, reverse or otherwise alter the tim ing of 
events been thought  through and ac commodated?   
• Can agent following be used by a follower to pi ck up contact patterns of the leader?  Is it 
importan t for the follower to und erstand the theory of the learned pa ttern because it is 
likely to  be transferre d to a new context?   Is the risk  of reduced inform ation diversity 
 6-3
through pervasive agent f ollowi ng acceptable or addressed by assuring a m ix of strongly 
and weakly clustered contacts?    
• Can signa l following be used to a lter interaction patterns of an agent to move it toward 
locations that have a better value?  How is the risk of ge tting stuck at a local m aximum 
addressed?   
• Can boundary form ation (through or ganizational restructuring and changes in policy) be 
used to create an archipelago-like env ironm ent that favors diversity  and adaptation?   
• Can separation of tim e scales be used to organi ze operations  so that activities with long er 
time fram es govern or set the context of activities with shorte r time fram es?   
• Can stress be distributed across a system  in a way that does  not increas e the p otential of a 
large-scale failu re?   
• Can good organizational ro utines be created and bad ro utines modified easily?    
• Are action s of agents with in a sys tem or en terprise altering the structure of th e system ’s or 
enterprise’s physical a nd conceptual space s even if the agents ar e not directly  intent on 
chang ing th eir co llectiv e inte raction pat terns or erecting or elim inating barriers?  
6.1.2.3  Selection 
• How can s election  be used to prom ote adaptation?    
• Are selection tradeoffs being m ade in a context th at goes beyond an i mmediate decision?  
Does the trad eoff cons ider facto rs important to future decisions, like variety versus 
uniform ity and innovation versus exploitation?   
• Are perform ance m easures v iewed  as ins truments for shaping w hich ev ents ar e likely to 
occur?   
• What criteria of success  are used to select  types that becom e more or less comm on over 
time?  Are th ere m ultiple criteria?  Is  selection  done by m any agents o r few? 
• Is success defined in a way th at enhances the chan ces for e ffecti ve lear ning?  Is success 
measured frequently enough to en able learning?  When outcom es are s urprising (b etter o r 
worse th an expected ), is the exp erience used to revise the definition of success so tha t it 
will produce m ore accu rate re sults in th e futu re?   
• If challeng es are lon g-term  or widespread, do the m easures of success balance fine-
grained  and frequ ent feed back to promot e learning wi th appropriate lev els of exploratory 
behavior?    
• When using indirect m easures of success is care taken to assure that th e measures  are 
causally related to succe ss and not just positiv ely cor related wit h results that matt er?   
 6-4
• Can m odest changes in perform ance m easures profoundly affect  which agents or 
strateg ies are cop ied and wh at adaptation will occur?  
• Can awards and recognitions be used to change success cr iteria to ones that  are di fferent  
from current standards?   
• Should selection be perf ormed at the agen t level, strategy level or  represent a hybrid?    
• Can selectio n pressu res be influenced?  Is sele ction pressure high or  can it be m ade high 
(which produces a tendency for a small num ber of the very best agents to be copied)?  Is 
selection p ressure low or can it  be m ade low (which  produces a s light ten dency for better 
agents to b e copied m ore and thus provides am plificat ion for so mewhat successful 
agents)?   
• Do the factors of cost, waiting time, and difficulty of inferenc e favor selecti on at the level 
of agents, strategi es, or a hybrid?    
• Do perform ance m easures m ake system atic m istakes in attribu ting cr edit?  If the likely 
mistake is crediting a part when a larger ense mble is responsible  can a different 
observation perspective be found ?  If the likely m istake is  attributing credit to one 
ensem ble when another is responsible can different interaction patterns am ong 
subpopulations generate new com binations of ideas?  If the li kely m istake is a failure to 
understand the role of contex t can “surprises” fuel im provem ent through learning?   
• What mechanism s should be used to  create n ew agents o r strateg ies? 
6.2 Examples 
It is th e nature of a complex so cial sys tem or enterp rise th at som e of its im portant attributes do not 
scale from  the sys tem or system-of-sys tems level.  What follow s are exam ples of en terprise-lev el 
thinking and processes that m ay not have well-developed (or needed) system  or sy stem-of-
system s level anteceden ts.  Note how the think ing and questions com e from the discussion in 
Sections 2 through 5. 
6.2.1 Portfolio Management 
A technologically soph isticated enterprise whos e capital is know ledge and the abil ity to apply it 
looks at the f uture from  the pers pective of:  “what hard questions or problem  areas do w e want to 
be working on in the next  five to fifteen years” and “how do we positi on ourselves to increase our 
likelihoo d of bein g selected for and succeed ing in th em?” This is a form  of the basic q uestion, 
“what w ill bring us to a future we would prefer?”   
The an swer is sim ilar to the fam iliar “what will bring m e to a financ ial future I wou ld prefer?” It is 
sound portfolio m anagem ent.  And it is portfolio m anagement with a view th at looks beyond the 
short-term  perform ance or curr ent value of th e individual instruments which com prise the 
portfolio.  It requires th e right balance between di fferent investm ent types.   That balance can and 
does change over tim e due to factors like s tage of life, oth er obligations and e xpenses (college 
 6-5
tuition, car paym ents, unexpe cted catastrophic a sset loss) and change in life  goals.  Viewed in this 
way, m anaging th e “balance” or the “w hole” is clea rly m ore than the summ ation of m anaging th e 
parts of the portfolio.   
There will always be a n eed to look at and m anage the im mediate and short-term  perform ance of 
the sep arate cur rent programs within  an enterprise portfolio.  B ut it is future-oriented “hard 
problem  areas” that focus our atte ntion on m anaging a port folio in a way th at moves the en terprise 
towards various preferred fut ures. 
Consid er the following f uture problem areas from the perspective of enterprise portfolio 
managem ent.   
Example:  T he next genera tion of U.S. AEW&C system 
What is the right amount of va riety in the AEW&C enterpr ise portfolio when considering the 
next generation of U.S. A EW&C system?  Do es the curr ent portfolio pro vide a mix o f 
technical problems and experienc es that will be applicable  to the next generation U.S. 
AEW&C including those surrounding  choice of platform, sens ors, informa tion systems, 
communications and networks?  If  not, how can that variety be  created?  Shou ld an attempt 
be made to redefine en gineering roles and technical focus of current work? Should new w ork 
be brought in that requ ires the a ssum ption o f less cove ted task engineering roles instead of a 
general systems engineering and integration role if it provides  the opportunity to acquire 
intelle ctual c apital in a c ritical future techno logy?104  Should some program s in the portfolio 
be divested?  If the po rtfolio itself cannot  be changed in a way that brings in opportunities to 
acquire critical intell ectual capital are ther e ways of changing A EW&C enterprise interaction 
patterns to increase the likeli hood of acquiring it?  F or example,  can exchange programs be 
initiated with other program of fices (e.g., E-10A, N avy Hawkeye, GIG)  in which intellectual 
capital is acquired via periodic  meetings or engineer exchang e programs?  Is the population 
of AE W&C enterprise staff bei ng viewed primarily through a lens  of current problems? Or is 
the population of staff being as sessed and modified through trai ning and hiring to assure the 
right mix o f techno logy skills and dom ain experience for addr essing the next generation of 
AEW&C?  What is the right ba lance between servicing curren t programs and positioning for 
the fu ture?   
Example:  T he next gene ration o f air situa tion awareness (SA)  systems 
The next generation of air SA systems has o ther so lution po ssibilities beyond AEW&C options 
consisting of different combina tions of airborne platforms, onboard sensors, m ission system  
capabilities, and communi cations.  Alternatives  include space-based and unmanned aerial 
vehicle (UAV) -based sensors and d ifferent options for mis sion crew location.  As  a result, the 
variety in technology and mi ssion experience required ex pands to include space-based 
                                                 
104 Note that the portfolio perspectiv e permits a view of a low-im pact/h igh-value activ ity as on e that need never 
grow to high impact as a si ngle program itself so long as it serve s an enterprise-level high impact futu re need. 
 6-6
radars, UAV s, UAV-based sensors, contro l mechanisms for UA Vs, and com munications 
between a remotely loca ted mission crew and space-based or in-theater air SA  assets.  These 
are longer-term possibili ties than the next genera tion of AE W&C .  How much intellectual 
capita l in these ar eas is  needed now?  How much is needed later?  Does it ne ed to ex ist in the 
AEW&C enterprise or can it reside in a broader  enterprise portfolio?  If the latter, wh at 
should be the interaction patt erns between them and the AE W&C enterprise?  How should the 
intera ction s evolve over time?   
Example:  T he next ge neration of SA systems 
The next generation of SA  systems goes beyond air SA to include ground SA and perhaps 
other domains.  The variety in  technology and m ission experience needed  encompasses both 
airborne moving target  indicator (AMTI)  and gr ound moving target  indicator (GMTI)  areas.  
Portfolio management questions arise concerning program, tech nology focus, and staff m ix, 
as they did in considering the next generation of AE W&C and air SA systems.   
But there are new and diff erent questions, as we ll.  Interesting inte ractions arise when 
thinking of solutions to problem s that have been ad dressed separately in the past.   For 
example, current AMT I  (e.g., A WACS)  and GMTI (Joint STARS)  capabilit ies have completely 
separate sensors, mission sy stems, communication systems and platforms.  C urrent day 
tactics, techniques and proced ures for the two c apabilities are incomme nsurate in a number 
of importan t respects (e.g ., on-sta tion o rbits, sen sor inform ation  exch ange w ith oth er network 
participants and its ti ming) .  What does a solution look like in w hich both A MTI and GMTI 
missions are both well-ser ved at the same time and not traded off against each other in a zero-
sum game?  How can the principl e of multidim ensionality (Secti on 4.3)  be used to interpret 
these opposing tendencies as mutu ally interdependent dimensions that can interact and be 
integrated in a new way of th inking about  situation awar eness?  Are there oppor tunities for 
transformational innovation at the intersection of the AMT I and GMTI domains – domains 
that have largely evolved along se parate paths?  Can AMTI and GM TI information be used to 
develop new and useful representa tions of interacti ons or relationships  among objects in 
different dom ains?  Does this then  change the nature of  situation awareness?   Does it suggest 
unimagined cross-domain system operator roles, mission app lications, and decision-support 
aids?  Do these new areas need  to be explored?  By whom? 
6.2.2 Evolving Enterprise P rocesses an d Practices 
Enterprises that develop products  have an interest in m easuring the progress of product 
developm ent.   
From  a single program  or product  perspective, the f ocus of  incremental sy stem development is 
primarily concerned w ith the ultim ate goal of successfully fielding th e full capability of a specific 
system  or capability.   
 6-7
As a result, it is comm on in system  acquisitions to u se interm ediate  measurem ents to give insight 
into questions such as “is th e program  on course” a nd if not “what are we  doing wrong and how 
do we correct it.”   
In developing products or cap abilities, particularly highly  com plex ones, interm ediate 
measurem ents are als o the bas is of build-a- little, te st-a-little increm ental acqu isition  approaches.   
Their focus on developing work ing, useful interm ediate capabili ties m ore readily leads to the 
successful deploym ent of a full capability.   
In an enterprise that develops m any products, system s, or capabilities, part icularly over an 
extended time, there is an opportuni ty to exam ine interm ediate deve lopm ent criteria to determ ine 
whether they  accurately p redicted developm ent success and how  they could be im proved for 
future developm ents.  The focus of this perspe ctive is on im proving the interm ediate m easurem ent 
criteria used to track the progr ess of product, system , or capability developm ent not on the status 
of a particular product in developm ent.   
Surpris es (results d ifferent - better or worse - th an expected) can help rev ise success criteria so 
that, in future developm ents, attr ibution of credit is a ble to p roduce more accurate results, 
provided one can correlate facto rs that were observable or predictable in the short run with the 
surprise.  The que stion becom es, “W hat observab le criteria w ere often high  or low when the result 
was better or worse than expect ed?”  T his is an im portan t shift from a focus on “wha t predicted 
the outcom e” to “what predicted  the surprise,” i.e., the deviation of  what occurred from  what was 
expected.   
This kind of process allows the en terprise to a ccumulate a s tore of increasingly accurate criteria 
for attrib uting credit to a vari ety of i ntermediate positions in developing pr oducts, systems or 
capabilities.   The en terprise thus evolves its acquisition proc esses, learning f rom its own 
experiences.  The en terprise be comes collectively more cap able in a way th at enab les managers of 
future program s to m ake increas ingly m ore intelligent decisi ons throughout the development 
cycle. 
 6-8
7 Postscript 
What is the relationship betwee n traditional system  engineering as ex emplified by the INCOSE 
model presented in S ection 3 an d the evolutionary de velopm ent fram ework for com plex sy stems 
of Section 5?  Is there any?  Ar e there m ore than on e?  Th ere is  no sim ple answer as of this 
writing, but the discussion in this report suggests so me interrelationship an d at least a partial 
nature of it.   
The INCOS E model produces system s, subsystem s, and system s-of-system s.  For this discussion, 
call them  all “prod ucts.”  Ther e are m any developers producing products which perform  similar 
roles or functions.  And there is variation or differentia tion across these simila r products.  So, one 
view is tha t traditional system engineering produces artif acts that prov ide variety for th e pro cesses 
of interaction and selection that  result in im proved f uture produ cts.  To u se the AEW &C exam ple 
again, the cu rrent m arket of AE W&C system s prov ides th e variety for the next generation.   
But th ere are other artifacts that com e out of executi ng a tradition al sys tem engineering process 
like the INCOSE model.  Im prove d system  engineering processes do.  And th ere is variety in 
these p rocess es which fuels th e evolutionary m odel that produces im proved future processes.  So, 
clearly the traditional m odel feed s the evolutionary m odel.   
It wo rks th e othe r way , as well.  Changes occur in well def ined, deterministic proc esses, whether 
introduced by m istake (e.g., misunderstanding of a system  engineer ing process by an 
inexperienced em ployee) or  by design (e.g., deliberate  attem pt to innovate).  And so evolution is 
found in and part of the very fabric of the traditional syst em engineering process.   
The relationship between the trad itional system engine ering and the evolutionary developmental 
framework is akin to the yin-yang105 symbol which suggests that  they are com plementary 
elements.  B oth are needed to fo rm the “whole”  and each contains an aspect of the other. 
 
 
 
Figure 7-1.  Yin Yang Symbol
                                                 
105 The Yin Yang is also cal led the Tai -Chi symbol. The Tai-Chi is from I-Ching, a foundation of Chinese 
philosoph y. 
 7-1
 
 
 
