March 2019  
1 Exceptions Decision Logic Table  (DLT) for Supervisors  
Exception/ Category  Action Required  
Performance Plans  
Working < 90 days  1.Is the employee a student, inte rn, on excepted service appointment? If yes go to 2
2.Will they be working less than 90 days during the appraisal period? If yes, use this exception .
3.Will the student be working more than 90 days in the FY?  Plan is needed
Temporary appointment  < 1 year  1.Is the employee on a temporary appointment? If yes go to 2
2.Is the appointment “not to exceed date” for less than 1 year? If yes, go to 3
3.Has the employee agreed to serve without a plan? If yes,  use this exception.
4.Will the employee be considered for reappoi ntment or pay increases? Plan is needed.
5.Has the “N ot to exceed date ” been  extended beyond 1 year?  Plan is needed.
No longer with Agency  1.Has the employee left the agency o r had termination of employment, such as  transfer to another
agency , resignation, r etirement , removal?  Use this exception.
2.Will the employee be with the agency past the deadline?  Plan is needed.
Onboard /New Position  < 15 days  1.Has the employee been onboard less than 15 days from enter on duty date (EOD)?  Use this
exception .
2.Has the employee been in a new position (promotion, change in duties) less than 15 days? Use this
exception.
3.Has it been more than 15 days?  Plan is needed.
On Extended Leave  1.Is the employee on extended leave of any kind to include annual, leave, sick leave, leave without pay
(LWOP) , leave of absence, FMLA, OWCP, AWOL?  If yes, use this exception.
2.If on LWOP and they are a student/intern, use “ Working < 90 days ” exc eption
3.Has the employee returned from leave? If yes, plan is needed
On Military Duty /Leave  1.Is the em ployee on military duty or military leave? If yes, use this exception.
2.Has the employee returned from duty or leave?  If, yes plan is needed
Extended appraisal  period > 09/ 30 1.Has the appraisal /rating period been extended past the 9/30 end date to allow fo r 90 days in the
appraisal  period? Use this exception. New plan starts after rating end date.
2.Has the rating period ended? Cannot be later than November 14 .  If yes , plan is needed.
EmpowHR issues /access  1.Is access to EmpowHR not available? If yes go to 3
Ju ly 2018  
2 2.Are you having issues with EmpowHR? If yes go to 3
3.Have you contacted Performance and Compensation Branch for assistance? If no, do so.
4.Was Performance and Compensation Branch able to fix the access or issue? If no, use this
exception .
5.Was the issu e resolved? If yes, continue performance processes.   If no, do a paper  or hard copy.
Complete Hard or Paper Copy 1.Was the supervisor unable to get the plan entered into EmpowHR? Use this exception. Do a plan on
an AD-4 35E or AD-435S form and obtain signat ure s
2.Were any of t he thre e parties, supervisor, reviewer or e mploy ee unable t o  sign the plan in
EmpowHR? Use this exception.  Hardcopies of plans, progress reviews 
and ratings are to be sent via
ServiceNow
Completed but employee refused to 
sign 1.Has the supervisor instructed the employee to check the box “ Employee refused to sign”  in
EmpowHR ? If yes, use this exception or s upervisor prints a copy and notates employee refused to
sign and  date. Notify Performance and Compensation Branch in these cases.
Other issues  **Contact Performance and Compensation Branch for assistance via ServiceNow.  
Midyear Progress R eviews  
Same  exceptions as plans  (above) 
except  Extended appraisal period exception does not apply to midyear progress review . 
Plan not in place for 60 days  1.Was the plan not completely signed by all parties for 60 days?  Use this exception.
2.Was the plan signed by all after the deadline?  If yes, use this exception then complete the progress
review process  after the 60 days.
Plan in place after March 30  1.Was the plan put in place after March 30? If, yes, do a progress review at a half-way point .
Plan needs to be modi fied 1.The current plan in the system needs to be modified before progress review done? Use this
exception.  Exception ONLY valid for 15 days.
Appraisal s/Ratings  
Same exceptions as plans  (above)  
Plan in place < 90 days 1.Was the plan in place less than  90 days in the appraisal period? If yes, use this exception .
On extended appraisal period  1.Was the employee on an extended appraisal period? If yes, use this exception. This exception is only
valid until November 14 , when the ratings must be completed.
Completed hardcopy  1.Was the rating done outside of EmpowHR in a paper or hardcopy? Use this exception.
Provide the fully signed rating document with all plan pages to Performance and Compensation 
Branch via ServiceNow for manual input and upload to the employee’s eOPF.
