 

How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
2 / 26 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Author:  Ronald G. Ross  
Co-Founder & Principal, Business Rule Solutions, LLC  
Executive Editor, www.BRCommunity.com  
Chair, Business Rules & Decisions Forum Conference  
Twitter: @Ronald_G_Ross  
Editor:  Keri Anderson Healy  
Editor, www.BRCommunity.com  
 
The author would like to acknowledge …  
 Gladys S.W. Lam , Co-Foun der & Principal of Business Rule Solutions, LLC, who co -developed the 
concepts and approach describ ed in this Primer . 
 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
3 / 26 ABOUT THIS PRIMER  
There’s a high premium on knowing how to 
craft great definitions . Every business analyst 
should know how. That skill is the focus of this 
Primer. By the way, terms in this Primer in this 
font are defined in the Primer’s Glossary . 
There are various schools of thought about  
how to define terms, some arising from 
profess ional terminologists and  academia .  
But those approaches  are often relatively 
arcane and not well -suited to everyday  
business practice.  
So ConceptSpeak™ , the BRS approach, stays  
with common dictionary practices . They  
are perfectly adequate  for your needs . By 
‘dictionary’ I mean natural language dictionaries  
of course, not any kind of dictionary arising 
from IT (e.g., data dictionaries).  
Definitions with subtle IT or ‘data’ bias are an 
anathema to effective communication with 
business partners. Good busine ss definitions  
are oriented to what words mean when used  
by real business people talking directly about 
real business things . 
If you want to talk about how data is retained  
or exchanged , do a data model . A good data 
model has definitions too of course, but they 
subtly relate to fields and data types, not 
directly to things in the real world. That  
bias throws them off -center for business 
communication. This implicit mindset is often 
hard for those with a data or IT background to 
unlearn. But not impossib le! If you fall into this 
category, this Primer will teach you how.  The business counterpart to a data model is  
a concept model . How to create a concept 
model is well beyond the scope of this Primer, 
but if you are doing a concept model, the style 
of definitions described in this Primer will suit 
you perfectly.  
This Primer is organized as a set of guidelines, 
each with one or more examples. Each guideline 
can be understood on its own, but the overall 
set is mutually supportive and comprehensively 
inter locking. Master this set of guidelines and 
your definitions are guaranteed world -class.  
BASIC CRITERIA  FOR GREAT BUSINESS DEFINITIONS  
To get you started, here are some basic criteria 
for great business definitions:  
 It should be easy to give examples for  
the thing defined, but there should be  
no counterexamples . 
 Each definition should communicate the 
essence of what a thing is, not what it  
does, how it’s used, or why it’s important.  
 The definition of a thing should focus on  
its unique characteristics.  
 Each thing you define should be 
distinguishable from every other thing  
you define using the definition alone.  
 Each definition should be concise and as 
short as possible without loss of meaning.  
A definition should be readable . 
One thing may surprise you about great 
business definitions. The very first noun in  each 
definiti on is absolutely key. These  first word s are  
the secret sauce of excellent definitions . That’s 
where we’ll pick up with the guidelines.  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions  for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
4 / 26 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 1 
ABOUT THIS PRIMER  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 3 
Basic Criteria for Great Business Definitions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  3 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 4 
1.  SETTING UP A DEF INITION PROPERLY  ................................ ................................ ............................. 5 
Guideline 1.1  The definition for a term should start with a noun.  ................................ .............................  5 
Guideline 1.2  The kick -off word of a definition should not be the term being defined.  ....................  5 
Guideline 1.3  A definition should not be simply a synonym of the term defined.  ...............................  6 
Guideline 1.4  The kick -off word of a definition and the concept being defined should align.  ....... 6 
2.  AVOIDING PLURALS  IN SETTING UP A DEFI NITION  ................................ ................................ .......... 9 
Guideline 2.1  The term being defined should be given in the singular form.  ................................ ........  9 
Guideline 2.2  The kick -off word of a definition should be given in the singular form.  ......................  9 
3.  CAPTURING THE ES SENCE OF A CONCEPT  ................................ ................................ .....................  11 
Guideline 3.1  The definition of a term should express t he essence of the concept, not its 
purpose, function, or use.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  11 
Guideline 3.2  A definition should be clear about whether the concept being defined is an 
individu al or a general concept.  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 11 
4.  ENSURING THE INT ERNAL QUALITY OF DEF INITIONS  ................................ ................................ ..... 13 
Guideline 4.1  A definition should not comprise multiple sentences.  ................................ .....................  13 
Guideline 4.2  A definition should not embed business rules.  ................................ ................................ .... 13 
Guideline 4.3  A definition should  provide a clear antecedent for each embedded pronoun.  ....... 14 
Guideline 4.4  A definition should provide a clear antecedent for each definite article after the 
kick -off word.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 14 
5.  ALIGNING MULTIPL E DEFINITIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................  15 
Guideline 5.1  The definition of a qualified term should not depart in kind from the meaning of 
the term that has been qualified.  ................................ ................................ ...............................  15 
Guideline 5.2  The definition of a qualified  term should not repeat (or conflict with) text in the 
definition of the underlying term.  ................................ ................................ .............................  15 
Guideline 5.3  A definition of a term, or some significant part of that definition, should not be 
repeated in the definition of another term.  ................................ ................................ ...........  16 
Guideline 5.4  The definition of  a compound term should not depart in meaning from that of the 
underlying terms taken collectively.  ................................ ................................ .........................  17 
Guideline 5.5  A set of definitions should not be circular.  ................................ ................................ .............  17 
6.  CONTEXT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 19 
Guideline 6.1  An entry whose meaning cannot be standardized for the entire scope of a 
vocabulary should be disambiguated by context.  ................................ ...............................  19 
GLOSSARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  21 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR: RO NALD G. ROSS  ................................ ................................ ............................  25 
ABOUT BUSINESS RULE SOLUTIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 26 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
5 / 26 1.  SETTING UP A DEFINITION PROPERLY  
GUIDELI NE 1.1 THE DEFINITION FOR A TERM 
SHOULD START WITH A NOUN .  
Discussion:   A definition should express what a 
thing is, not what it does. So the first significant 
word in a definition should be a noun or noun 
phrase rather than a verb. This noun or noun 
phrase is called the kick-off word . 
Example:  governance process  
Poor definition:  identifies  decision makers 
and the process and information required  
for a decision to be made and describes   
how approvals and prioritization decisions 
are made  
This definition is built around two verbs, 
identifies  and describes , which e xpress 
something about what the concept does,  
not what it is. The concept being defined, 
governance process , is first and foremost a 
process. So the concept should be defined  
with  that starting point.  
Revised definition:  a process  by which 
appropriate d ecision makers use relevant 
information to make decisions regarding  
a change or solution, including means for 
obtaining approvals and priorities  
This revised definition expresses what  
a governance process is by including an 
appropriate noun, process , to initiate the 
definition.  GUIDELIN E 1.2 THE KICK -OFF WORD OF A 
DEFINITION SHOULD NO T BE THE TERM BEING 
DEFINED .  
Discussion:   The first word in a definition  
should be some noun other than the term  
being defined.  
Example:  developer  
Poor definition:  a developer  is responsible 
for the engineering of solutions  
That a developer is a developer is a tautology. 
Saying so adds nothing.  
Revised definition:  a professional  
responsible for the engineering of solutions  
The revised definition indicates that a devel oper 
is a professional. Understanding of the concept 
has been enhanced.  
Example:  indicator  
Poor definition:  An indicator  identifies  
a specific numerical measurement that 
indicates progress toward achieving an 
objective.  
This definition is given as a com plete sentence 
with the term being defined, indicator , as the 
kick-off word. Repeating the term in the 
definition is unnecessary and merely makes  
the definition wordier. Definitions should be 
given as phrases, not sentences. The basic idea 
is that the phr ase could be substituted for the 
term in any business communication you write 
with no change in meaning.  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
6 / 26 Revised definition:  a numerical 
measurement that gauges progress  
toward achieving an objective  
The revised definition is given as a phrase  
rather th an a sentence. It does not embed the 
term being defined, indicator . In any business 
communication you write, instead of indicator  
you should be able to say “ numerical 
measurement that gauges progress toward 
achieving an objective ” and mean exactly  the 
same  thing.  
Note also that the verb indicates  in the original 
definition was changed to gauges  in the revised 
version. A verb form of the term being defined 
generally should not be used in a definition for 
that term.  
GUIDELINE 1.3 A DEFINITION SHOULD NO T BE 
SIMPLY A SYNONYM OF THE TERM DEFINED .  
Discussion:   A synonym  of a term means exactly 
the same thing as the term itself. It provides no 
additional understanding.  
Example:  evaluation  
Poor definition:  an assessment  
Evaluation  and assessment  mean the same 
thing. Identifying a synonym does not provide  
a definition.  
Revised definition:  the result of assessing, 
judging, appraising , or interpreting something  
The revised definition brings clarity to the 
underlying concept. For example, it indica tes 
that, for intended usage under this vocabulary , 
an evaluation is a result, not an act.  
It can be useful to capture accepted synonym(s) 
of a term. A synonym is included as its own  entry  in a vocabula ry, as follows. The  term that 
follows  “see” should b e the term preferred for 
usage — in this example, evaluation . 
assessment:  see evaluation  
GUIDELINE 1.4 THE KICK -OFF WORD OF A 
DEFINITION AND THE  CONCEPT BEING DEFINE D 
SHOULD ALIGN .  
Discussion :  The initial noun or noun phrase  
in the definition of a concept  should simply 
represent  a more general (broader) concept or 
class of things than th e concept being defined. 
The rest of the text in the definition after the 
kick-off word should indicate how the concept 
being defined is:   
 distinguished from that mo re general 
concept or class, or  
 is a special  case or variation of that  
more general concept or class . 
Example:  analyst  
Poor definition:  a generic name  for a role 
with the responsibility for gathering and 
assimilating data or requirements  
The first noun in this definition is name . A  
flesh -and-blood analyst, the thing being 
defined, cannot possibly be a name . Analyst   
and name  are two distinct concepts; name  is 
not a more general or broader concept or class 
of things than analyst . The terms do not align.  
Revised definition:  a professional  
responsible  for gathering and  
assimilating data or requirements  
The first noun in this revised definition  
is professional . Analyst  and professional   
align. An analyst is simply one variation  
of professional . 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
7 / 26 Example:  walkthrough  
Poor definition:  a type  of peer review in 
which participants review a proposed 
solution  by stepping through its workings 
together  
The kick -off word in this definition is type . A 
real-world walkthrough cannot possibly be a 
type . Walkthrough  and type  are two distinct 
concepts; type  is not a more general or broader 
concept than walkthrough . The terms do not 
align.  
Revised definition:  a peer review  in which 
participants review a proposed solution  by 
stepping through its workings together  
The first (compound) noun in this revised 
definition is peer review . Walkthrough  and peer 
review  align. A walkthrough is a variation of 
peer review. Peer review  is a more general or 
broader concept or class than walkthrough . The 
rest of the text in the def inition expresses how a 
walkthrough is a special case or variation of a 
peer review.  
Example:  goal  
Proposed definition:  qualitative statement  
of a state an organization is seeking to 
establish and maintain  
The kick -off word in this definition is statement . 
Goal and statement  are two distinct concepts; 
statement  is not a more general or broader 
concept than goal . The terms do not align. A 
goal might be expressed  by a statement, but 
that is not what a goal is. 
Revised definition:  a state  an organiz ation  
is seeking to establish and maintain, usually 
expressed qualitatively rather than 
quantitatively  The first noun in the revised definition is state . 
Goal and state  align. A goal is a desired state. 
State  is a more general or broader concept  
than goal. The rest of the text in the definition 
expresses how a goal is a special case of a state.  
Example:  actor  
Poor definition:  a human or nonhuman  
role that plays a part in a process  
Assume human  and nonhuman  are being used 
in this definition as adjectives — that is, as 
modifiers of role. The kick -off word is therefore 
role. Actor  and role are two distinct concepts; 
role is not a more general or broader concept 
than goal . The terms do not align. A role might 
be played  by an actor, but that is something an 
actor does , not what an actor is. 
Revised definition:  a human, device , or 
system  that plays a part in a process  
Instead of a single first noun, this revised 
definition lists three:  human, device, and 
system . If no single term is evident that  
covers all relevant variations  of the more 
general or broader concept or class  
appropriate for the definition, a short list  
such as this one is acceptable.  
Example:  methodology  
Poor definition:  a framework  that 
determines which tasks and techniqu es  
can be used to solve a problem  
The kick -off word in this definition is 
framework . Merriam -Webster Unabridged 
Dictionary  (MWUD) yields no definition of 
methodology  that supports it being a kind  
of framework. Methodology  and framework   
are two distinct concepts; framework  is not  
a more general or broader concept or class  
than methodology . The terms do not align.  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
8 / 26 MWUD does offer the following definition (1a) 
for methodology :  a body of methods, 
procedures, working concept s, rules, and 
postulates employed by a science, art, or 
discipline.  Therefore a better definition of 
methodology  might be the following.  
Revised definition:  a body of methods, 
techniques, procedures, working concepts , 
and rules that can be used to solve a  
problem  
The beginning noun phrase in this revised 
definition is body of methods, techniques, 
procedures, working concepts , and rules . A  
noun phrase such as this one is acceptable  
in initiating a definition. A methodology is  
a variation of the concept that whole noun 
phrase represents.  
  
 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
9 / 26 2.  AVOIDING PLURALS IN SETTING UP A DEFINIT ION 
GUIDELINE 2.1 THE TERM BEING DEFINED SHOULD 
BE GIVEN IN THE SING ULAR FORM .  
Discussion:   A term designates a concept.  
A definition essentially expresses what each  
and every instance  (example or case) of that 
concept is. Ambiguity can therefore arise when 
the term is given in the plu ral form. Does the 
definition apply to only some of the instances  
or to all of them? Such ambiguity can be  
avoided if the term being defined is given  
in the singular form.  
Example  
Poor entry : 
experiments :  acts or operation s carried  
out under controlled conditions to test, 
establish, or illustrate the workability of  
a solution  
The term defined in the entry above is given  
in the plural form. These questions arise:  
 Does the entry refer to a particular kind or 
group of experiments, or to each an d every 
experiment of any kind or group?  
 Are the experiments only those that relate  
to the workability of a particular solutio n, or 
to any experiment apart from what solution  
it might be addressing?  
Revised entry:  
experiment :  an act or operation carried   
out under controlled conditions to test, 
establish, or illustrate the workability of  
a solution  
This revised entry gives the term in the singular 
form. It removes doubt about the applicability and scope of the definition. The meaning  
the definition exp resses is what must be  
true about each and every instance of the 
concept experiment . 
Example  
Poor entry:  
actor(s) :  human s, device s, and  system s  
that play  a part in a process  
The term defined in this entry is given in a 
parenthetical plural form. It should be given   
in the singular form. No “s” or “(s)” is needed  
or desirable. So the entry should simply be:  
Revised entry:  
actor :  a human, device , or system  that  
plays  a part in a process  
GUIDELINE 2.2 THE KICK -OFF WORD OF A 
DEFINITION SHOULD BE  GIVEN  IN THE SINGULAR 
FORM .  
Discussion:   Just as the term being defined 
should be given in the singular form, the first 
significant word in its definition should be  
given in the singular form as well. Since a 
definition expresses what each and every 
instance of the concept is, the kick -off word 
should be expressed such that it could be used 
to reference any given instance.  
Example:  constraint  
Poor definition:  limitations  imposed on a 
solution by circumstances or available means  
The kick -off word in this defi nition, limitations , 
is given in the plural form, which suggests one 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
10 / 26 constraint is many limitations. Something is  
lost in the meaning. A constraint might produce  
many limitations, but that possible fact does  
not express what any given constraint is. A 
particular  constraint is just one thing.  
Revised definition:  a limitation  imposed on a 
solution by circumstances or available means  
A definition should always express what a thing 
is. This revised definition expresses that a 
constraint is first and foremo st a limitation.  
Example:  initiative  
Poor definition:  specific projects , programs , 
or actions  under taken to satisfy business 
requirements  
This definition includes three kick -off words 
separated by an or (which is acceptable). 
However, each of the words appears in the 
plural form, which suggests a given constraint 
could be many projects, programs, or actions. 
An initiative, however, should just be one of 
those three things.  
Revised definition:  a project , program ,  
or action  under taken to satisfy business 
requirements  
The revised definition expresses that a 
constraint is one of: a project, a program, or an 
action. The word specific  has also been replaced 
by the article a. Already implicit in the definition  
is that an initiative is one ‘specific’ thing.  Example:  context  
Poor definition:  the circumstances  that  
form the setting for an event or interaction  
There could be many contexts. Each of those 
contexts is one particular thing. The kick -off 
word of the definition should adhere closely to 
that unitary sense. Circumstances  in the plural 
form does not.  
Revised definition:  a set of circumstances  
that form the setting for an event or 
interaction  
The word set has been inserted into the 
definition to form the new kick -off word phrase 
set of circumstances . Set gives the unitary sense 
appropriate for the definition.  
 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
11 / 26 3.  CAPTURING THE ESSENC E OF  A CONCEPT  
GUIDELINE 3.1 THE DEFINITION OF A T ERM SHOULD 
EXPRESS THE ESSENCE OF THE CONCE PT, NOT ITS 
PURPOSE , FUNCTION , OR USE .  
Discussion:   Things can have multiple  
purposes, functions, or uses, and those things 
may vary in different contexts or over time.  
The core essence of a concept, in contrast, 
varies little or not at all viewed from different 
perspectives or at different times. Effective 
business communication requires focusing  
on core meaning.  
Example:  business requirement  
Poor definition:  a need or demand required 
of a solution by som e stakeholder(s)  which 
will serve as a bridge to system design  
The phrase which will serve as a bridge to 
system design  in th is definition  explain s one 
purpose of a business requirement . That 
purpose may be paramount to some people, 
but perhaps not to others. For example, 
business requirements might be used by 
business staff to prepare for training of workers 
or new hires. The b usiness staff might not care 
about, or might even disagree with, the 
expressed rationale.  
Explanation of purpose, function, or use should 
be removed from definitions. If worth retaining 
for future reference, it can be given as separate 
note(s)  for the term ’s entry . That way the 
definition itself can serve equally well for 
multiple audiences, each with different ideas  
or insights about the relevance of the concept.  Revised entry:  
business requirement :  a need or demand 
required of a solution by some stakeh older(s) 
in the business  
Note:   Business requirements serve often 
serve as a bridge to system design.  
GUIDELINE 3.2 A DEFINITION SHOULD BE  CLEAR 
ABOUT WHETHER THE CO NCEPT BEING DEFINED IS AN 
INDIVIDUAL OR A GENE RAL CONCEPT .  
Discussion:   Definitions are often required for 
individual things, especially when the individual 
is abstract or intangible rather than a particular 
person or place. Special caution should be 
exercised for words that can be taken in the 
sense of either individual  or general concept . 
Example:  observation  
Poor definition:  assessing a work 
environment  as a means to elicit 
requirements  
The intended meaning of observation  could  
be either of the following:  
 a particular method of eliciting requirements.  
 a particular act or instance of using that 
method to elicit requirements.  
Which is meant? The former meaning views 
observation  as one particular method  of  
eliciting requiremen ts. As such it designates  
an individual, one particular thing. In the 
following definition note use of the, rather  
than a, to correctly indicate the thing is  
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
12 / 26 one particular individual (of the general  
concept method ). 
Revised definition 1:  the method of eliciting 
requirements that is based on direct viewing 
of a work environment  
The second meaning above views observation  
as an act where the given method is actually 
applied, presumably one act among many 
others of the same kind. In the following 
definition note use of an, rather than the,  
to correctly indicate the definition refer s to  
any of many individuals. The kick -off word  
has also been changed from method  to act  
or instance . 
Revised definition 2:  an act or instance of 
eliciting requirements that is based on direct 
viewing of a work environment  
  
 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
13 / 26 4.  ENSU RING THE INTERNAL QU ALITY OF DEFINITIONS  
GUIDELINE 4.1 A DEFINITION SHOULD NO T 
COMPRISE MULTIPLE SE NTENCES .  
Discussion :  A definition that involves multiple 
sentences is almost always a poor  one. Su ch 
expansive text generally focuses on positioning, 
differentiating, or motivating the concept being 
defined, rather than just expressing its essence. 
The additional text is better handled as notes.  
Example:  transition requirement  
Poor definition:  a requirement that an 
organization must  support to enable 
migration from current state to future sta te. 
Unlike other requirements, transition 
requirements represent temporary needs, 
rather than more permanent ones.  
The add -on sentence in this definition me rely 
differentiates transition requirements from 
other kinds of requirements. The initial phrase 
already does that job (or should). The sentence 
should be treated as a separate note, as follows.  
Revised definition:  a requirement that  
an organization must  support to enable 
migration from current state to future state  
Note:  Unlike other requirements, transition 
requirements represent temporary needs, 
rather than more permanent ones.  
Example:  process  
Poor definition:  a set of activities whose 
sequence is designed to produce some 
desired result. A process takes raw materials 
or inputs and transforms them into finished 
goods or outputs, thereby creating or adding 
value. A process is guided by policies, rules, 
standards, guidelines, and work instructions 
as appropriate.  This definition includes two add -on sentences 
and is quite long. There are two possibilities:  
 Some part(s) of the two follow -on sentences 
are needed in the kick -off phrase to fully 
differentiate the concept being defined from 
all others. In tha t case those essential part(s) 
should be included as part of the definitional 
phrase itself.  
 The add -on sentences merely elaborate  
the meaning of the lead -in phrase. In that 
case the sentences should be included in  
one or more  separate note (s) for the te rm’s 
entry as follows.  
Revised definition:  a set of activities  
whose sequence is designed to produce  
some desired result  
Note:  A process takes raw materials or 
inputs and transforms them into finished 
goods or outputs, thereby creating or  
adding value.  
Note:  A process is guided by policies, rules, 
standards, guidelines, and work instructions 
as appropriate.  
GUIDELINE 4.2 A DEFINITION SHOULD NO T EMBED 
BUSINESS RULES .  
Discussion:   Definitions should focus on the 
core essence of what someth ing is. They should 
not prescribe any business rule  — or even hint 
at doing so. Rules can change. To ensure 
continuity of business understanding over time, 
but additionally optimize agility, the best 
approach is to carefully segregate definitions 
and rules . For this reason keywords suggesting 
rules (e.g., must ) should be carefully avoided in 
crafting definitions . 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
14 / 26 Example:  transition requirement  
Poor definition:  a requirement that an 
organization must  support to enable 
migration from current state to futur e sta te 
In English, the word must always suggest s  
some rule(s). Obligations and necessities  
should be expressed and managed separately 
from definitions. The focus of every definition 
should simply be on core meaning.  
Revised definition:  a requirement th at 
enables migration from current state to 
future state  
In the revised definition the word must , as well 
as the implied obligation on an organization, has 
been removed. The definition simply expresses 
what the concept is. 
GUIDELINE 4.3 A DEFINITION SHOULD PROVIDE A 
CLEAR ANTECEDENT FOR  EACH EMBEDDED PRONOU N.  
Discussion :  Ambiguity readily occurs when a 
pronoun in a definition lacks a clear antecedent. 
Each pronoun, if any, should be clearly resolved.  
Example:  context  
Poor definition:  a set of circumstanc es  
that form the setting for an event and  
that provide the basis by which it can be  
fully understood and analyzed  
This definition includes the pronoun it.  
Its antecedent might be any of set (of 
circumstances) , setting, event,  or even basis . 
Different p eople could read distinct meanings 
based on resolution of the pronoun’s 
antecedent. At the very least, careful readers 
will stumble over the unresolved reference.  
Revised definition:  a set of circumstances  
that form the setting for an event and that 
provide the basis by which the event  can be 
fully understood and analyzed  The revised definition resolves the ambiguity  
by substituting the event  for it. 
GUIDELINE 4.4 A DEFIN ITION SHOULD PROVIDE  A 
CLEAR ANTECEDENT FOR  EACH DEFINITE ARTICL E 
AFTER THE KICK -OFF WORD .  
Discussion :  Confusion or ambiguity can occur 
when a noun or noun phrase representing a 
general concept (not an individual thing) is 
preceded by the definite article  (the) whose 
reference is unclear. Each such reference in a 
definition, if any,  should be clearly resolved.  
Example:  stakeholder  
Poor definition:  a person or organization 
with an interest or concern in the initiative  
This definition includes the word initiative , 
which is preceded by the definite article the. 
The the suggests one of the following:  
 Initiative has already appeared in the 
definition, and this additional use is 
referencing that same instance. A quick  
scan of the definition, ho wever, shows  
no such prior use.  
 The initiative is an individual thing. If it i s  
an individual, however, why hasn’t its name 
been used to clarify which initiative is meant?  
 Neither of the above is the case and use of 
the definite article is simply inappropriate. 
Assuming this to be the case, the definition 
should read as follows.  
Revised definition:  a person or organization 
with an interest or concern in an initiative  
The revised definition resolves the ambiguity  
by substituting the indefinite article an for the 
definite article the. 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
15 / 26 5.  ALIGNING MULTIPLE DEFINITIONS  
GUIDELINE 5.1 THE DEFINITION OF A Q UALIFIED 
TERM SHOULD NOT DEPA RT IN KIND FROM THE 
MEANING OF THE TERM THAT HAS BEEN QUALIFIED .  
Discussion :  Suppose a term  has been defined; 
now a qualified version of that  same term  is 
being defined . The qualified term should never 
be defined as something fundamentally 
different in kind from the term  that has been 
qualified . Otherwise, misundersta nding and 
miscommunication almost always result . 
Example:  capability , organizational ca pability  
Definition (capability):  an ability  that 
enables something to achieve some  
goal(s) or objective(s)  
Poor definition  (organizational capability ):   
a function  internal to an organization 
comprising people, processes, technologies, 
information, and  knowledge that enables the 
achievement of business goals and objectives  
The former definition defines a capability as  
an ability. The latter definition defines an 
organizational capability as a function . A 
function , however,  is not an ability.  The 
defini tions show a fundamental mismatch  
in kind  between the concepts being defined.  
Revised definition  (organizational 
capability):  a capability  internal to an 
organization comprising people, processes, 
technologies, information, and knowledge 
that enables the  achievement of business 
goals and objectives  
In the revised definition capability  has been 
substituted for function . The meaning of the 
business concept organizational capability   now aligns naturally and intuitively with the 
meaning of the broader business concept, 
capability . Organizational capability is simply  
a special kind of capability , perhaps one of 
many . 
Note that this revised definition includes the 
phrase that enables th e achievement of business 
goals and objectives , which seems simply to echo 
what the definition of capability  already says. 
That observation leads to the next guideline.  
GUIDELINE 5.2 THE DEFINITION OF A Q UALIFIED 
TERM SHOULD NOT REPE AT (OR CONFLICT WITH ) TEXT 
IN THE DEFINITION OF  THE UNDERLYING TERM .  
Discussion :  Suppose a term  has been defined; 
now a qualified version of that  same term  is 
being defined . The two terms are appropriately 
aligned in kind; that is, the kick -off word of the 
definition for the l atter term is the former term 
itself. In that case there is no need to repeat 
text in the definition of the qualified term  
that already appears in the definition of  
the underlying term. That meaning applies 
intrinsically. Repeating it opens the door to 
divergence.  
Example:  capability , organizational capability  
Definition (capability):  an ability that 
enables something to achieve some goal(s) 
or objective(s)  
Poor definition  (organizational capability ):   
a capability  internal to an organization that 
com prises  people, processes, technologies, 
information, and knowledge and that 
enables the achievement of business goals 
and objectives  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
16 / 26 The definition of the qualified term  
organizational capability  properly uses  
the kick -off word capability . The definition  
of capability  includes the phrase enables 
something to achieve some goal(s) or 
objective(s) . The sense of that phrase is 
repeated in the definition of the qualified  
term. Assuming there is no subtle difference  
in meaning imposed by the word business  in 
that definition (an important assumption that 
should be validated  carefully) the corresponding 
phrase in the definition of the qualified term is 
redundant. The phrase should be removed.  
Revised definition  (organizational 
capability):  a capability internal  to an 
organization that comprises people, 
processes, technolo gies, information,  
and knowledg e 
The careful reader will note t his revised 
definition remains somewhat ambiguous.  
What does the phrase that comprises people, 
processes, technologies, information, and 
knowledge  actually modify? Does it modify 
capability  or organization ? The target noun  
for every modifying phrase should be  
crystal clear . 
Revised definition  (organizational 
capability): a capability that is  internal  
to an organization and that comprises 
people, processes, technologies,  
information, and knowledg e 
This second revised  definition features  
insertion of an and before  the phrase  that 
comprises people, processes, technologies, 
information, and knowledge . Now the  
definition is clear that the target noun is 
capability , not organization . In addition, to 
balance the definition structurally and further clarify what is being modified, that is  has  
been inserted before the phrase internal  
to an organization . 
GUIDELINE 5.3 A DEFINITION OF A TERM , OR SOME 
SIGNIFICANT PART OF THAT DEFINITION , SHOULD NOT 
BE REPEATED IN THE D EFINITION OF ANOTHER  TERM .  
Discussion:   The meaning of each term in  
a vocabulary  should be single -sourced — in  
other words, specified in one and only one 
place. Repetition of text expressing the same 
meaning in different definitions opens the  
door to unintended or undetected divergence  
in that  meaning and to unnecessary and 
counterproductive questioning of the 
corresponding definitions.  
Example:  process , process model  
Definition (process):  a set of activities  
whose sequence  is designed to produce  
some desired result  
Poor definition  (process model):  a 
representation, usually visual, of the 
sequential flow among a set of ac tivities  
The definition of process  includes the core 
notion set of activities  (having ) sequence .  
This same notion is repeated in the definition  
of process model . Assuming there is no  
subtle difference in meaning imposed by  
the word flow  in the latter definition  (an 
important assumption that should be  
validated  carefully) the corresponding  
phrase in the definition of process model   
is redundant. It should be removed. Such 
repetition is undesirable because it opens  
the door to divergence of the definitions.  
The difference in wording might also be  
taken as indicating something different is  
meant than simply process . 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
17 / 26 Revised definition  (process model):  a 
representation, usually visual, of a process  
The phrase  the sequential flow among a set  
of activities  has been replaced by the term 
process  in this  definition of process model.  
The meaning of that phrase is already expressed 
in the definition  of process . To highlight the 
appearance of defined terms in definitional  
text, special notation such as capitalizat ion 
and/or colored font can be useful.  
Definition with colorized term (process 
model) :  a representation, usually visual,  
of a process  
GUIDELINE 5.4 THE DEFINITION OF A C OMPOUND 
TERM SHOULD NOT DEPA RT IN MEANING FROM T HAT 
OF THE UNDERLYING TE RMS TAKEN COL LECTIVELY .  
Discussion:   Suppose two or more  term s have 
been defined; now another term is being 
defined that is simply those same terms taken 
together. The meaning of such a compound 
term  should not depart from the collective 
meaning of the two or more compounded 
terms individually. Otherwise, misundersta nding 
and miscommunication can result . Also, the 
definitions of the two or more compounded 
terms should not be repeated for the 
compound term. To do so invites divergence.  
Example :  process , model , process model  
Definition (process):  a set of activities  
whose sequence is designed to produce  
some desired result  
Definition (model):  a representation and 
simplification of reality created to  provide 
insight or understanding for some audience  
Poor definition  (process model):  a 
representation, usually visual , of a process  If model  is defined, and process  is defined, is  
a process model  really something more than 
those two terms taken together? The fact that 
process model  has been defined with words 
beyond just process  and model  suggests it 
might . 
Assuming there is no subtle difference in 
meaning imposed by the phrase usually  
visual  in the definition of process model   
(an important assumption that should be 
validated  carefully) the term model  can be 
substituted in that definition. Indicating  
that a process model is a representation  
is redundant. According to the definition  
of model  all models are repre sentations.  
Revised definition  (process model):   
a model  of a process  
Note :  A process model is usually visual.  
This revised definition  simply references the 
two compounded terms  model  and process .  
The meaning of the concept process model  
now aligns naturally and intuitively with the 
meanings of the underlying concepts, process 
and model . The additional phrase usually  
visual  has been included as a note.  
GUIDELINE 5.5 A SET OF DEFINITIONS S HOULD  
NOT BE CIRCULAR .  
Discussion:   A set o f two definitions is  
circular  if both definitions embed the  
term for the other concept. A set of three  
or more definitions is circular if each  
definition embeds the term for the next.  
There is no good starting point for 
understanding such a set of concepts.   
Circular sets of definitions always embody  
one or more faulty assumptions.  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
18 / 26 Example :  business requirement , initiative , 
stakeholder  
Definition in a circular set (business 
requirement):  a need or demand required  
of a solution by some stakeholder(s)  
Definition in a circular set (initiative):  
specific projects, programs, or actions 
undertaken to satisfy business requirements  
Definition in a circular set (stakeholder):   
a person or organization with an interest  
or concern in an initiative  
These t hree definitions are circular. The 
definition of business requirement  references 
stakeholder , whose definition in turn references 
initiative , whose definition — coming full circle 
— references business requirement . Circularities 
cause confusion and are simply unnecessary. A 
business vocabulary  includes only a tiny fraction 
of the words in a natural language like English, 
so circularities can be easily avoided . 
Resolving circularities requires careful analysis 
of the definitions involved. If you had to start 
from scratch, which concept is most basic? 
Conceptually, where would you start in building 
up the sum of the knowledge that the business 
vocabulary represents?  
The suspect definition in the circularity above  
is the one for business requirement . Maybe  
no sta keholder wants to own or be seen as 
originator of some business requirement. Does 
that fact make the business requirement not a 
business requirement? No. And if not business 
requirement  what would you call such a thing?  So the  phrase by som e stakeholder(s)  should  
be removed from the  definition  of business 
requirement . 
revised definition (business requirement):   
a need or demand required of a solution  
This definition captures the essence of the 
concept.  It also breaks the circularity among  
the three original definitions.  
Definitions of concepts such as initiative  and 
stakeholder  that reference other terms should 
ultimately trace back to seed concepts . A seed 
concept  is one whose meaning depends on no 
other concept  defined within the vocabular y 
that includes it. Its definition therefore embeds 
no other terms included within that vocabulary. 
All words in the definition of a seed concept 
take their meanings from definitions in a 
common natural -language dictionary. Seed 
concepts are fundamental bu ilding blocks of 
business vocabularies . 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
19 / 26 6.  CONTEXT  
GUIDELINE 6.1 AN ENTRY WHOSE MEANIN G 
CANNOT BE STANDARDIZ ED FOR THE ENTIRE SC OPE OF 
A VOCABULARY SHOULD BE DISAMBIGUATED BY 
CONTEXT .  
Discussion:   A fundamental goal for a business 
vocabulary is to standardize meaning such that 
every term can be used without ambiguity in 
any business communication. Therefore, each 
term should have one and only one meaning .  
Achieving that goal, unfortunately, is not  
always possible. The sco pe of intended usage 
for a vocabulary may include some audience  
for which a particular term has a deeply 
ingrained and well -justified meaning that 
unavoidably clashes with the meaning for  
some other audience — or possibly even  
that same audience. As the  scope of the 
vocabulary grows wider, the more likely  
such clashes become.  
Where standardizing the meaning of an entry 
proves pragmatically unachievable, the entry 
should be disambiguated by context . 
Example:  work product  
Definition likely to clash:  a diagram,  
document , or collection of notes created   
by business analysts in business modeling  
or requirements development  
This definition defines work product  for  
an audience  of business anal ysts. But 
operational business areas also have work 
products for conducting day -to-day work —  
e.g., bills of lading, blueprints, estimates,  
price quotes, schematics, etc.  The definition above is therefore likely to  
clash with understanding of work produ ct  
by a business audience. Even if no business 
audience per se is within the scope of 
vocabulary usage, the definition could  
cause confusion within the business analyst 
audience itself. Day -to-day work products  
used by some targeted business area are  
often examined as a routine part of business 
analysis activity.  
The preferred solution is to rename work 
product  for business analysts’ own activities 
using appropriate qualification — e.g.,  
business analysis work product . 
That solution, however, may be de emed  
too disruptive. In such case the entry should  
be qualified by context, as follows:  
work product [business analysis ] 
a diagram,  document , or collection  
of notes created  by business analysts  
in business modeling or requirements 
development  
This revi sed entry includes a  second term   
in brackets , business analysis , to ensure the 
context of the definition is clear.  This second 
term should itself also have a definition in  
the business vocabulary . 
Example:  product  
Definition likely to clash:  a solution  
created  by business analysts  for some 
business need(s), usually but not always 
ultimately including software  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
 
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
20 / 26 This definition defines product  for an audience  
of business anal ysts. But in day -to-day work , 
operational business areas also support 
produc ts — the value -add goods or services 
requested by third parties. The definition  
above is therefore likely to clash.  
The preferred solution is to rename product   
for business analysts’ own activities using 
appropriate qualification — e.g., business 
analysi s product . 
That solution, however, may be deemed  
too disruptive. In such case the entry should  
be qualified by context, as follows:  
product [business analysis ] 
a solution created  by business analysts  
for some business need(s), usually but  
not always ultimately including software  
This revised entry includes a  second term   
in brackets , business analysis , to ensure the 
context of the definition is clear.  
The careful reader may have noticed that  
the two disambiguated definitions in the 
examples presented  in this section (for  
work product *business analysis+  and  
product *business analysis+ , respectively)  
violate guidelines presented in Section 5.  
The definition of the qualified term, work 
product *business analysis+ , does not build  
on the definition o f the unqualified term, 
product *business analysis+ . 
This anomaly can be eliminated by using  
the latter term as the kick -off word in the 
definition of the former term . product [business analysis ] 
a product [business analysis]  in the form  
of a diagram,  document , or collection of 
notes created in business modeling or 
requirements development  
This revised definition for work product 
*business analysis+  features the new kick -off 
word product *business analysis+ . The phrase  
by business analysts has also be en removed 
from the definition since it already appears  
in the definition of broader concept, product 
*business analysis+ . The revised definition 
assumes a work product *business analysis+   
has the sense of solution  … for some business 
need(s ), the essenc e of the meaning of product 
*business analysis+ . This assumption, of course, 
should be validated carefully . 
 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
21 / 26  
 
GLOSSARY  
 
      Term  Definition  Example(s)1 Note(s)  Dictionary Basis2 
business rule  a criterion that guides 
conduct or action or that 
shapes an operational 
business decision  1. A customer must not 
place more than three rush 
orders charged to its credit 
account.  
2. A customer must be 
considered a preferred 
customer  if the customer 
places more than five 
orders over $1,000  in a 
calendar year .  A business rule  that 
guides conduct or 
action  is called a 
behavioral rule . See 
example 1 at left.  
  A business rule  that 
shapes an operational 
business decision  is 
called a definitional  (or 
decision ) rule. See 
example 2  at left.   
business 
vocabulary  a vocabulary  used by a 
business, government or 
industry, possibly but not 
necessarily for a special 
area of knowledg e    
circular 
definitions  a set of two or more 
definitions  each of which 
embeds the term  for 
another concept  defined 
in the  set The following three 
definitions  are circular . 
 business requirement:  
a need or demand  
required of a solution  
by some stakeholder (s) 
 initiative: specific 
projects, programs,  
or actions  undertaken  
to satisfy  
business requirements  
 stakeholder: a person  
or organization with   
an interest or concern  
in an initiative  
The definition  of business 
requirement  references 
stakeholder , whose 
definition  in turn 
references initiative , whose 
definition , coming full 
circle, references business 
requirement . Circular definitions  in a 
business vocabulary  
cause confusion and are 
simply unnecessary. 
Resolving them requires 
careful analysis of the 
definitions  involved:  
 If you had to start from 
scratch, which concept  
is most basic?  
 Conceptually, where 
would you start in 
building up the sum of 
the knowledge that 
the business 
vocabulary  represents?   
                                                           
1 Examples designated “A” and “B” pertain to aspects of the same problem in multiple entries.  
2 Each dictionary basi s appearing in this column is from Merriam -Webster Unabridged Dictionary . 
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
22 / 26       Term  Definition  Example(s)1 Note(s)  Dictionary Basis2 
compound term  a term  consisting of two 
or more other terms  Assuming process  and 
model are defined terms , 
process model  is a 
compound term . The meaning of  a 
compound term  should 
not depart from the 
collective meaning of  
the two or more 
compounded terms  
individually. Otherwise, 
misunderstanding  
and miscommunication 
can result .  
concept  something conceived in 
the mind : THOUGHT, 
IDEA, NOTIO N:   (taken directly  
from MWUD)  
concept model  a blueprint for the 
semantics represented by 
a business vocabulary   Contrast with data 
model .  
ConceptSpeak™  the Business Rule 
Solutions, LLC (BRS) set of 
conventions, guidelines, 
and techniques for 
defining terms , designing 
a concept model , and 
developing a structured 
business vocabulary     
context  some thing that provides 
boundaries for the 
meaning of the term  
representing a concept  Suppose work product 
[business analysis] is 
defined as a diagram, 
document, or collection  
of notes created by 
business analysts in 
business modeling or 
requirements development.  
The term business analysis  
corresponds to the thing 
that establishes the context 
within which this definition 
is correctly understood .  The term  establishing 
the context  for 
another term  should 
be included in brackets 
after the latter term . 
 A term establishing 
context for another 
term should always 
have a definition  
in the same  
business vocabulary.  
 Acks  to Sjir Nijssen  
for definition .  
data model  a blueprint that identifies 
business entities and 
relationships to be 
represented as data in a 
system or database design   Contrast with  
concept model .  
definite article  the word the in English   the in “the Eiffel Tower”   Contrast with  the 
indefinite article a, as 
in a tower . 
 Contrast with  
definite modifier .  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
23 / 26       Term  Definition  Example(s)1 Note(s)  Dictionary Basis2 
definite 
modifier  a modifier specifically 
designating an individual   the in “the Eiffel Tower”  
 this in “this card”  
 that  in “that house”  
 my in “my father”  
 Paul's  in “Paul's absence”   Contrast with  
definite article . [definite 1, 
adjective] 3a : of  
a grammatical 
modifier : typically 
designating an 
identified or 
immediately 
identifiable person 
or thing  
definition  a word or phrase 
expressing the essential 
nature of a person or 
thing or class of persons 
or of things : an answer to 
the question *what is x?* 
or *what is an  x?* Refer to any of the 
definitions  in this Glossary.   (taken directly  
from MWUD 2) 
entry  a set of one or more 
textual passages, possibly 
along with information  
in other media, that  
serve to define and 
explain a concept  The following text, which 
includes a definition   
and two notes ,  
represents a single entry  
in a business vocabulary   
for the concept  process . 
process: a set of activities 
whose sequence is 
designed to produce 
some desired result  
Note:  A process takes 
raw materials or inputs 
and transforms them into 
finished goods or 
outputs, thereby creating 
or adding value.  
Note: A process is guided 
by policies, rules, 
standards, guidelines, 
and work instructions  
as appropriate . An entry  usually cons ists 
of text, but may include 
a graphic illustration, 
diagram, recording or 
information in other 
media as useful to 
communicate meaning.   
general concept  a concept  that can 
correspond to potentially 
many instances  A. tower  
B. nation  
C. scientist  
D. requirement technique  Contrast with individual .  
individual  one particular thing  A. the Eiffel Tower  
B. Canada  
C. Isaac Newton  
D. the requirements 
technique ‘use cases’  Contrast with  
general concept . 1 : a single or 
particular being or 
thing or group of 
beings or things  
instance  an example or a case  The real -life people named 
Isaac Newton, Albert 
Einstein, and Marie Curie 
are instances  of the 
concept  scientist . A value of a field or data 
type in a stored database 
or file is not an instance  
as meant by this Primer.  2b : something that 
is available or is 
offered as an 
illustrative case  
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
24 / 26       Term  Definition  Example(s)1 Note(s)  Dictionary Basis2 
kick-off word  the first significant word  
or word phrase  in a 
definition  In the following definition  
of developer  the kick -off 
word is professional .  
developer: a professional 
resp onsible for the 
engineering of solutions  Articles like “a”, “an” , 
and “the” are not 
considered significant.   
note  a brief writing intended to 
assist the memory or to 
serve as the basis for a 
fuller statement  Refer to any of the note s in 
this Glossary.   (taken directly from 
MWUD 3b1)  
seed concept  a concept  whose 
definition  embeds no 
other defined terms  In the vocabulary  
presented in this Glossary:  
 The concept  note  is  
a seed concept . 
  The concept kick-off 
word  is not a  
seed concept .  A seed concept  is one 
whose meaning 
depends on no other 
concept  defined within 
the vocabulary  that 
includes it.  
 All words in the 
definition  of a seed 
concept  take their 
meanings from 
definitions  in a 
common natural -
language dictionary.  
 Seed concepts   
are fundamental 
building blocks of 
business vocabularies .  
synonym  a word having the same 
meaning as another word  “automobile”, “car”  A synonym  can be 
included as its own  
entry in a vocabulary . 
The “see” term  in the 
synonym entry  should  
be the preferred  term  
for usage . (taken directly  
from MWUD 1) 
term  the name  given  to a 
general concept  A. “tower”  
B. “nation”  
C. “scientist”  
D. “requirement  
       technique”   8a : a word or 
expression that has 
a precisely limited 
meaning in some 
uses or is peculiar to 
a science, art , 
profession, trade, or 
special  subject  
vocabulary  a list or collection of 
words or of words and 
phrases usually 
alphabetically arranged 
and explained or defined  Refer to the collection of 
terms  and their respective 
entries  in this Glossary .  (taken directly  
from MWUD 1)  
     
How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
25 / 26 ABOUT THE AUTHOR: RONALD G. ROSS  
Ronald G. Ross  is Principal and Co -Founder of Business Rule 
Solutions, LLC  (BRS) , where he actively develops and applies  
the BRS methodology including RuleSpeak®, DecisionSpeak™ ,  
and ConceptSpeak™. Ron consults to companies worldwide  
through BRS . 
Ron is recognized internationally as the “father of business  
rules. ” He is the author of ten professional books including  
the groundbreaking first book on business rules The Business  
Rule Book  in 1994. His newest are:  
 Building Business Solutions : Business Analysis with Business  
 Rule s (2nd ed, 2015) with Gladys S.W. Lam  
 Business Rule Concepts: Getting to the Point of Knowledge  
 (4th ed, 2013) . 
Ron serves as Executive Editor of BRCommunity.com  and its flagship publication, Business Rules 
Journal . He is a sought -after speaker at conferences world -wide. More than 50,000 people have  
heard him speak; many more have attended his seminars and read his  books . 
Ron has served as Chair of the annual International Business Rules & Decisions Forum  conference 
since 1997, now part of the Building Business Capability  (BBC) conference. He is one of three 
members on the BBC Program Committee. He was a charter member of the Business Rules Group 
(BRG)  in the 1980s, and an editor of its Business Motivation Model  (BMM) standard and the 
Business Rules Manifesto . He is active in OMG standards development, with core involvement  
in SBVR  (Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules) . He was also a contributor to the 
IIBA’s BABOK v3 . 
Ron holds a BA from Rice University and an MS in information science from Illinois Institute  
of Techno logy. 
For more information about Mr. Ross, visit www.RonRoss.info , which hosts his blog . 
Tweets:   @Ronald_G_Ross  
 
 

How to Define Business Terms in Plain English : A Primer   Forming Business Definitions for Business Concepts  
© 2017  Business Rule Solutions, LLC. www.BRSolutions.com . All rights reserved.   
26 / 26 ABOUT BUSINESS RULE SOLUTIONS  
 
Business Rule Solutions, LLC  is the recognized world leader in the advancement  of business rules.  
Co-Founders Ronald G. Ross and Gladys S.W. Lam are internationally acclaimed as the foremost  
experts and practitioners of related  techniques and methodology .  
Since its inception in 1996, BRS has helped pilot the worldwide growth of business ru les.  BRS  
offers groundbreaking methodology fo r business rules, decision engineering, reverse -engineering,  
and business vocabulary (concept models), including the popular Rule Speak®, ConceptSpeakTM,  
DecisionSpeakTM, and TableSpeakTM. BRS services include consulting, mentoring, training, workshops, 
publications, and presentations.  For more information about BRS, visit http://www.BRSolutions.com . 

