Achieving Excellence in Business Development: The Business  
Development Capability Maturity Model, by Dr. Ginger Levin and  
Howard Nutt  
 
 
Introduction 
Maturity, accordin g to the Random House Dictionary, is defined as “full development or a 
perfected condition.” It also connotes understandin g or visibility as to why success occurs 
and ways to prevent common problems. It implies that capabilities must be grown over 
time. Harold Kerzner in his book, Strate gic Plannin g for Pro ject Mana gement Usin g a 
Project Mana gement Maturity Model (2001) states that “All or ganizations go throu gh a 
maturity process, and that this maturity process must precede excellence. The learnin g 
curve for maturity is measured in years.” 
Numerous maturity models have been prepared, be ginning with the Software En gineerin g 
Institute’s Capability Maturity Model for Software (SW-CMM). In December 2003, the 
Project Management Institute published its Or ganizational Pro ject Mana gement Maturity 
Model (OPM3). Maturity models provide a pro gressive standard to help or ganizations 
continue to improve their processes.  
Similarly in 2003, the Business Development Capability Maturity Model (BD-CMM) was 
published. Business development is an essential part of any business’ efforts to succeed 
and serves as the front-end to pro ject mana gement. It involves identifyin g and buildin g 
relationships with new customers and creating new opportunities with existin g customers. 
Throu gh business development, or ganizations then can pursue effectively chosen and 
delivered projects that lead toward comp etitive advantage and sustained growth.  
However, while business may fall into one’s plat e occasionally, no one can count on this to 
happen day after day or week after week without established policies, processes, and 
procedures in place. It is necessary to understand customer buyin g problems, their value 
considerations, and their selection process. Strategies must be established to maximize the 
win probability and to be able to analyz e the customer environment, needs, and 
requirements. 
 
An Overview of the Business Development Capability Maturity Model 
The BD-CMM (Figure 1) provides its users with a framework, a path, and a guide for 
achievin g dramatic process improvement in their or ganizations. It was fostered by the wish 
to have a process improvement map that or ganizations could use for assessin g business 
development effectiveness. The model's scope encompasses the full business development 
life cycle and or ganizational components, includin g advance marketin g, sales, proposal 
development, and sales account management, acknowledging that no one component can 
exist very long in isolation and that successes, when realized, are the orchestrated work of 
a team. 
. 
 
The BD-CMM defines “levels” of maturity throu gh which an or ganization must pass in order 
to achieve the next level. Each level is defined such that multiple areas of process improvement take place within the level, but each area’s activities fall within the overall 
characterization, or definition, of that level. The definitions for each level are very broad, 
to allow for a wide variety of or
ganizational behaviors, but clearly describe a pro gression of 
increased maturity. 
• The Initial level, characterized by ad hoc, chaotic processes and limited mana gement 
commitment, evolves to the Repeatable level through introduction of a disciplined process to business development projects.  Organizations operating at Level 1 rely on heroic efforts 
by a few talented individuals to craft approach es to customer requirements and respond to 
customer solicitations, while supporting them with virtually no resources and 
infrastructure.  
• Once the disciplined process is adopted at Level 2, repeatability replaces the chaos of 
Level 1. For most companies, this process repeatability relies on individuals who have been 
successful in winning new business. At Level 2, the Repeatable level, interest in improvin
g 
business development results focuses on the proposal mana gement process and is most 
often embodied in what worked for one or more past efforts. 
• The logical evolution from the Repeatable level to the Defined level is establishment of a 
standard, consistent process. For most companie s, this transition moves them away from a 
proposal-centric approach to lifecycle proce ss management, so that they focus on the up-
front sales or capture effort and overall process inte gration as critical success factors. 
Level 3 practitioners emphasize the value of trainin g, tools, and resources as process 
facilitators. 
• The Mana ged level is reached by a process characterized as predictable. Companies 
operating at this level typically are highly focused on customer relationships as essential 
drivers for process, actions, and infrastructure . In addition, they understand that business 
development must leverage the full range of enterprise resources and greatly value high-
performance teams as enablers to win strategic bids 
• The Optimizin g level results from continually improvin g process. Companies at this level 
are innovators in customer relationships, internal mana gement approaches, and processes, 
as well as focused on managing on going chan ges in both process and infrastructure. Level 
5 organizations are further characterized by business development entrepreneurship 
throughout the enterprise – that is, all employees accept responsibility to identify and champion new opportunities for business 
growth. Successful entrepreneurship is rewarded 
with professional growth 
A key characteristic of pro gression from level to level within the model is the increase in 
management visibility into the process. Typically, at Level 2, mana gement maintains 
visibility between phases of the ongoing process – understandin g at ma jor milestones what 
has been accomplished to date, based on the quality of the outputs of that phase. At Level 3, the insights are enhanced to embrace rigorous two-way communication at ma
jor 
milestones within process phases. Examples include readout and feedback at Color Team reviews, desi
gned to assure quality. The enabler of mana gement insi ght is the quality 
thread in the Focus KPC (Key Process Category). As Quality Mana gement matures from 
Quality Controland grows into Quantitative Process Mana gement, interactions with the 
enterprise provide continuous information and feedback loops across the organization. 
The levels of the BD-CMM as a series of plateaus do not necessarily reflect equal de grees 
of improvement. Just as introduction of a disciplined process is much less difficult than 
organizational adoption of that process, the pro gress from Level 1 to Level 2 is much more 
easily accomplished than the progression from Level 2 to Level 3. The process 
improvement required to move to successive levels becomes increasin gly more difficult to 
achieve.Level 2 
BD-CMM Level 2 is characterized by a business development process that addresses 
individual opportunities by reusin g successful past practices. Basic processes are 
established to track cost, schedule, and functionality, and the necessary discipline is in 
place to repeat earlier successes on business development opportunities with similar 
applications. Management has visibility into the business development process only at 
major milestones. The following six KPAs comprise Level2: 
• Response Generation: Key practices cover activities for understandin g customer 
requirements and needs and for preparing a re sponse to the customer as the basis for a 
transactionSample Issue: To what de gree are responses prepared in accordance with 
customer needs, instructions, and requir ements?Sample Practice: Defined methodolo gy to 
“strip” or “shred” the customer solicitation and allocate requirements to the proposal outline 
• Quality Control: Key practices encompass activities for controllin
g the quality of business 
development outputs, both internal and external to the performin g organizationSample 
Issue: Is the quality of BD process outputs monitored and controlled at critical, internal milestones?Sample Practice: Documented partic ipation and content for bid/no-bid decision 
meetings 
• Business Development Administration: Key practices define the administrative 
infrastructure necessary to maintain the required discipline in the business development process and to monitor performance and mana
ge resources across multiple 
opportunitiesSample Issue: Is an individual (or group) char ged with responsibility for 
managing BD practices?Sample Practice: Established “owner” for the proposal process who oversees process compliance 
• Individual Skills Development: Key practices focus on providin
g participants in business 
development with the individual training necessary for them to complete assigned 
tasksSample Issue: To what degree are funds dedicated for on going BD trainin g (includin g 
for proposal development)?Sample Practice: Standard line item in the BD departmental 
budget or the company training budget for training in specific skills 
• Sales/Capture Procedures: Key practices cover the documented and repeatable 
techniques employed for makin g a sale and developin g businessSample Issue: Does the 
organization follow a written policy for performin g sales/capture activities?Sample Practice: 
Formal policy that directs the or ganization to follow specific steps, involve specific 
personnel or departments, and adhere to a sequence of events in the process 
• Work Environment: Key practices focus on establishin g and maintainin g the physical 
infrastructure necessary to support a repe atable business development processSample 
Issue: To what de gree are workspaces (i.e., physical or virtual proposal centers, as 
appropriate) and resources provided to support efficient and effective business development?Sample Practice: “War rooms” provided for team collocation, or another form of appropriate collaborative workspace in placeLevel 3 
BD-CMM Level 3 is characterized by use of a standard business development process 
consistently across the organization. All business development activities use an approved, 
tailored version of the standard process. Mana
gement has visibility into individual activities 
and can prepare proactively for risks that may arise. The following KPAs comprise Level 3: 
• Solution Development: Key practices cover developin g and mana ging the process of 
tailorin g solutions to customer needs and requirementsSample Issue: Are customer 
solution preferences documented and communicated throu ghout the response team, 
including proposal staff?Sample Practice: Established methodolo gy for brid ging from 
capture or pursuit plan to a proposal plan 
• Quality Mana gement: Key practices involve the assurance of quality business 
development outputs and products throu gh activities for trackin g, measurin g and reportin g 
on business development performanceSample I ssue: Does management review in-process 
and consolidated reports and guide activities to mana ge risk and produce winnin g, 
customer-focused solutions?Sample Practice: Formal, documented offerin g reviews 
required throughout the business development cycle. 
• Organizational Tactics: Key practices instit utionalize standardized practices throu gh 
documentation, tools, templates and other key users’ aids and activate the or ganization’s 
ability to scale and tailor the process to unique acquisition requirementsSample Issue: Are 
appropriate personnel assi gned and authorized to perform pu rsuit tasks in accordance with 
process requirements (tailored to the specif ic pursuit and customer)?Sample Practice: Pre-
defined criteria and levels of authority established for business development mana gers 
based on size and type of pursuit being developed – e. g., strate gic versus routine 
opportunity. 
• Organizational Competencies Development: Key practices focus on career development 
and professional certification for business development personnelSample Issue: Does 
mana gement commit funds to motivate and support individual career development and 
professional advancement in business development?Sample Practice: Formal trainin g 
program institutionalized for career business developers, with provision for other participants in the process. 
• Sales/Capture Processes: Key practices cover standard techniques for customer interface 
and sales that are integrated into the over all business development processSample Issue: 
Are sales and capture methodolo
gies developed, maintained, documented, and verified by 
systematically analyzin g BD performance and direct customer feedback?Sample Practice: 
Formally institutionalized system to gather le ssons learned internally and externally and to 
assure management review on a defined, periodic basis 
• Support Systems: Key practices include standards for physical facilities, communications, 
collaborative work environments and other systems supportin g business 
developmentSample Issue: Do established su pport systems provide for both routine and 
surge aspects of sales/BD/proposal operations?Sample Practice: Established use of 
collaborative software, with business developme nt personnel trained and skilled in use of 
technology to manage pursuitsLevel 4 
Like other CMMs, the BD-CMM assumes that Level 3 represents the minimum “ goal state” 
to which most organizations should aspire.  Thus, Levels 4 and 5 represent an advanced 
state toward which companies should aspire as part of longer-term process development 
and continuous improvement.  At BD-CMM Le vel 4, detailed measures of the business 
development process and results are collected.  Both the process and its products are quantitatively understood and controlled.  The following KPAs comprise Level 4: 
• Relationship Mana
gement: Key practices address the process of buildin g customer focus 
and collaborative customer relationships that drive solutions to customer needs and 
requirements in a decidedly proactive mann erSample Issue: To what extent do early 
marketin g and customer contacts influence candidate solutions and the technical, 
management, and cost baselines that must be  developed to support decidedly customer-
focused outcomes?Sample Practice: Comprehensive set of customer issues documented in 
the pursuit plan and used by management to assure flow-down into  all customer 
interactions 
• Quantitative Process Mana gement: Key practices cover developin g and mana ging the 
business development process through a well-defined system of metrics, internal/external 
quality feedback, and quality mana gement initiativesSample Issue: Does the or ganization 
use a metrics-based system for routinely collectin g, analyzin g, synthesizin g, and applyin g 
customer feedback at critical milestones throughout the BD process?Sample Practice: 
Comprehensive, searchable database of customer lessons learned that permit win 
probabilities to be predicted accurately at the preliminary bid/no-bid review 
• Enterprise Influence: Key practices reflect a higher level of integration of business 
development mana gement within the overall business enterprise, such that the business 
acquisition mission within the or ganization actively influences all ancillary business 
decisions that potentially affect the company’s  ability to win businessSample Issue: Does 
the or ganization have and does mana gement use inte grated strate gies that ali gn 
compensation systems, product development plannin g, resource investment, and similar 
elements to maximize the organization’s posi tion to acquire strategic new, repeat, and 
follow-on business?Sample  Practice: Comprehensive set of trade studies available based 
on customer-specific studies to validate the value of the offerin g in the customer 
environment and application 
• High-Performance Teams: Key practices cover developing and maintaining BD-related 
competencies across the entire or ganization, thereby permittin g effective use of teams 
across the enterprise throu ghout the business acquisition cycleSample Issue: Is there a 
documented plan through which Sales/Busi ness Development characterizes and levera ges 
the use of cross-functional teams throu ghout the process, to maximize creativity and 
optimum solutions?Sample Practice: Pre-defined teams with project-specific expertise and direct customer knowledge available to support business development efforts 
• BD System Integration: Key practices focus on the extent to which the BD process has 
established linka
ges with other relevant enterprise processes to facilitate efficient, effective 
interchanges between BD process needs and inputs/feedback from ancillary enterprise 
processesSample Issue: To what extent does  the owner(s) of the documented sales/BD 
process pursue ongoing feedback and lessons-learned analysis amon g parallel, supportin g 
processes such as program mana gement, financial analysis and forecastin g, and similar 
functions within the or ganization?Sample Practice: Established participation in relevant 
process improvements across the company orga nization, focused on well-defined inputs 
and outputs throughout the business acquisition cycle 
• Infrastructure Mana gement: Key practices address the or ganizational ability to mana ge 
the complete ran ge of resources needed to maximize both the performance and efficiency 
of BD process operations, including feedback into process improvement activitiesSample 
Issue: To what level is consideration of the adequacy and effectiveness of sales/BD resources a systematic part of process metrics, lessons learned feedback, and process 
improvement planning?Sample Practice: Consistent, predictable plannin
g for continuin g 
business development requirements in terms of specific or ganizational needs, includin g 
clear understanding of return-on-investment and other performance measuresLevel 5 
At BD-CMM Level 5, continuous business development process improvement is enabled by 
quantitative feedback from the process and from pilotin g innovative ideas and technolo gy. 
The following KPA comprises Level 5: 
• Innovation and Transformation: Key practices hi ghlight that an or ganization that is 
continually optimizin g its BD operation proactively seeks to innovate how it adds customer 
value, mana ges performance and quality, builds competencies and teams, and enhances 
processes and systems.  This becomes the basis for on going transformation of the 
organization, as it adapts to a chan ging environment and flexes to new relationships with 
its customers.Sample Issue: Is there a defined strate gy, supported by mana gement, 
throu gh which the BD enterprise en genders specific innovations in customer interaction, 
business leadership, and team operations to achieve next- generation BD 
objectives?Sample Practice: Substantive ability to respond to the customer’s vision of 
future acquisition strategies (including such elements as next- generation electronic 
procurement) based on targeted organizati onal training in specific competencies 
Summary It is rare if a potential client that you do not know contacts you and asks you to work for 
them. Instead, this potential client typically will work with whomever they do know or can 
easily locate. It is therefore necessary to position the or
ganization in advance with the 
client to make sure your organization is the one the client will contact with the time arises. 
A foundation must be built for continuous business development success with a successful 
business strategy based on sustainable, co mpetitive advantages. The BD-CMM focuses on 
continuously improvin g business development practices in an or ganization as continuous 
improvement, not business as usual, is a prerequisite for success. 
Bios: 
Dr. Gin ger Levin is an independent consultant in pro ject mana gement and an Ad junct 
Professsor and Program Specialist in Project Management for the University of Wisconsin-
Platteville. She can be contacted at ginlevin@aol.com . Howard Nutt is the Executive 
Director of the Business Development Institute International ( www.BD-Institute.org ). He 
can be contacted at hwnutt@bd-institute.org . Dr. Levin and Mr. Nutt, alon g with Nancy 
Kessler, are the authors of the Business Developme nt Capability Maturity Model. It can be 
ordered through its publisher, Shipley Associates, at http://www.shipleywins.com . 
 
