Accelerated growth. Delivered.™
A New Perspective
on Strategy 
by Anthony W. Ulwick 
The goal of strategy formulation is to create a unique and valued competitive position, but until 
now, how this is done has been unclear.
This article explains what strategy really is and reveals the six growth paths that a company can 
pursue in any market to differentiate its offerings and grow revenue. Whitepaper
Contents
Introduction  .......................................................................................................................................................... 2
Deciding What Markets to Pursue  ......................................................................................................................... 3
Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy  .................................................................................................................. 6
Optimizing Profitability  ........................................................................................................................................ 13
A New Perspective  .............................................................................................................................................. 15
There are fundamental truths about strategy that are universally acknowledged. We know, for example, that 
a company can outperform rivals only if it can establish a difference that it can preserve, and we know that to 
succeed, a company must deliver greater value to customers or create comparative value at a lower cost, or both.1 
In the words of strategy guru Michael Porter, strategy is the creation of a unique and valuable position.2 Other 
widely espoused theories about strategy, however, have been less compelling. As companies become less tolerant 
of failed strategies, those theories should be debated and scrutinized. 
One assumption in particular should be reexamined. In his explanation of strategy, Porter also puts forth the 
notion that “activities are the basic units of competitive advantage.”3 This notion is widely accepted today, and 
Porter’s theory regarding strategy, which is centered around choosing activities that are different and/or performed 
differently while also being sustainable, is based on this assumption. Our interactions with hundreds of companies, 
however, have led us to another conclusion: we believe there is a more relevant and appropriate basic unit of 
competitive advantage: customers’ unmet needs. 
We put forward the proposition that all cost and price differences between companies ultimately derive from 
which unmet customer needs companies choose to target for value creation and the solutions that companies 
devise to satisfy those unmet needs. Similarly, differentiation arises both from the choice of which unmet needs 
to target and how those needs will ultimately be satisfied. A company secures a unique and valued competitive 
position by devising and delivering products and services that satisfy unmet customer needs. Activities, on the 
other hand, are enablers of competitive advantage, not basic units. They are what a company performs to execute 
its strategy—they are performed to satisfy customer needs or to create and deliver the products and services that a 
company chooses to offer. 
This sheds new light on just what strategy is. A strategy is a plan that sets the groundwork for how a company 
will grow. An effective strategy must inform a company along three critical fronts. First, it must identify attractive 
markets for value creation so that only worthwhile markets are pursued. Second, it must determine what unmet 
needs to target and what product portfolio is needed to gain the company a unique and valued competitive 
position. Third, it must dictate what operational capabilities and business model to employ to maximize revenue 
and minimize cost. With these insights, a company can pursue attractive markets with products and services 
that create customer value and company profitability. At the foundation is the recognition that when it comes to 
strategy, customer needs are the basic units of competition advantage. 
Whitepaper: A New Perspective on Strategy  21 Michael Porter, “What Is Strategy?,” Harvard Business Review 74, no. 6  (November–December 1996), 62.
2 Ibid., 68.
3  In “What Is Strategy,” Porter states that “cost is generated by performing activities, and cost advantage arises from performing particular 
activities more efficiently than competitors. Similarly, differentiation arises from both the choice of activities and how they are performed.”  
He concludes that “activities, then, are the basic units of competitive advantage”, 62Introduction
A New Perspective on Strategy  3Strategy begins with market selection, a task that entails discovering attractive new or emerging markets and 
deciding which, if any, should be pursued. This process poses distinct challenges, as new market discovery is often 
a chance occurrence and sizing markets has traditionally required knowing the amount of revenue generated by 
products sold in the market—which in a new market is zero. 
But these issues stem from a problematic definition of “market.” A market is sometimes defined by a technology 
(for example, the semiconductor market or the search market); other times, it is defined by the users of a product 
or service (the gamer market or the application developer market). Still other times, it is defined by a product or 
service (the printer market or the insurance market). Although adequate for many purposes, these definitions are 
unhelpful when it comes to market analysis and deciding what markets to pursue. We have found that it is much 
more useful to define a market in terms of high-level customer needs.4 
We know that people use products and services to get jobs done.5 Given this fact, it is possible to define a market 
in terms of the job executor (the person performing the job) and the specific job or jobs they are trying to get 
done. For example, an interventional cardiologist uses an angioplasty balloon to restore blood flow; parents use a 
reward system to motivate their children to get good grades; a home owner uses an electric door opener to open 
the garage door. The jobs of restoring blood flow, motivating children, and opening the garage door all represent 
potential markets. As you may imagine, a near endless number of markets exist. 
A market thus defined is exceptionally stable because the jobs customers are trying to get done don’t change 
much over time, although the solutions they use to get those jobs done may. The jobs of restoring blood flow, 
motivating children to get good grades, and opening a garage, for example, have been around for years, even 
though the solutions devised to get those jobs done have changed. Companies that stay focused on the job and 
not the solution can avoid the greatest business pitfalls. If Penn Central had recognized that its market was not 
railroads (which represent a solution), but rather, that it was helping suppliers of raw materials with the job of 
4  See Anthony W. Ulwick and Lance Bettencourt, “Giving Customers a Fair Hearing,” MIT Sloan Management Review 49, no. 3  (Spring 2008), 
62–68, for a detailed description of how to define customer needs in terms of jobs and outcomes. 
5  This idea was first articulated by Theodore Levitt in “Marketing Myopia,” Harvard Business Review 38, no. 4  (July–August 1960), 45–56.  
We made the job the customer is trying to get done the unit of analysis in our consulting engagements beginning around 1995. We shared 
our idea with Clayton Christensen, who cited and publicized it in “The Innovator’s Solution,” cowritten by Michael Raynor; Harvard Business 
School Press (2003). Today, it is commonly accepted that people buy products and services to get jobs done. Deciding What Markets to Pursue 
A New Perspective on Strategy  4transporting those materials, helping manufacturers 
with the job of transporting finished goods, and 
commuters with the job of getting to and from work, 
it might have avoided bankruptcy in 1970. Other 
companies were eventually formed to help customers 
get those jobs done. 
Although our definition of “market” is centered around a job executor and the job the executor wants to get done, 
it is important to note that the executor and job exist in a market ecosystem with other constituents. The purchase 
decision maker, for example, executes the job of making the purchase; the installer performs the job of installation; 
the maintenance department executes the job of troubleshooting and repair. Of course, people don’t buy products 
so they can install them or have them repaired; they buy them to get a job done. However, these other activities are 
important to the overall execution of the job. We call these secondary activities “consumption chain jobs.” 
As we shall demonstrate, defining a market in terms of job executors and the jobs they want to get done not 
only helps a company discover new and emerging markets, it also makes it possible for the company to size those 
markets. Companies can also redefine existing markets from this perspective, thereby gaining a stronger focus on 
the creation and delivery of customer value. 
Discovering New and Emerging Markets 
New jobs (and hence markets) are constantly emerging. They arise from many sources, but four in particular are 
worth mentioning: macro changes, discoveries, policy changes, and the introduction of a new product or service. 
From climate change, for example, emerged the jobs of monitoring ocean levels and controlling emissions; 
from the discovery of DNA emerged the job of DNA sequencing; from new policies surrounding prescription 
drug purchases in the United States emerged the job of acquiring prescription drugs from Canada; and from the 
invention of the airplane emerged the jobs of piloting and maintaining an aircraft. Those companies who are first 
to recognize the emergence of new jobs and to address them with effective products and services will realize the 
all important first-to-market advantage. 
New market discovery can be accomplished in one of two ways. First, companies can ask their current customers 
what new jobs they may want to get done as a result of a specific macro change, discovery, policy change, etc. 
Second, a company can select an attractive demographic to study, such as business owners, the elderly, health care 
providers, or carpenters, for example, and uncover what new jobs have arisen or may arise for that demographic 
as a result of a specific macro change, discovery, etc. 
In preparation for these interviews, the company must be aware of macro changes, discoveries, policy changes, 
and recently introduced products. Interviewees should be asked specifically about each macro change, discovery, 
and so on. For example, in today’s environment, a company might ask home owners what new jobs they would 
like to get done given that housing prices have declined (a macro change). They might find that home owners Deciding What Markets to Pursue 
Those companies who are first to recognize 
the emergence of new jobs and to address 
them with effective products and services 
will realize the  
all important first-to-market advantage.
A New Perspective on Strategy  5want to obtain a new property value assessment so as to lower their property taxes or to renegotiate a mortgage 
with a lender to reduce the risk of foreclosure. With dozens of possible new markets in its crosshairs, a company 
can then turn to sizing those markets. 
Sizing a market that (from a traditional view) doesn’t exist 
When using the job as the unit of analysis, much can be discovered about the size and attractiveness of a new 
or emerging market even before any product has been introduced into it. Through primary market research, a 
company can determine: 
1. How many people execute a certain job 
2. How frequently they execute that job 
3. How satisfied they are with their ability to get that job done 
4. How much money they spend today piecing together solutions to get that job done 
5. How much time they spend getting that job done 
6. How much they are willing to spend to get that job done perfectly 
7. The longevity of that job—the number of years that job will likely be performed 
A market would be considered most attractive if it has a large number of job executors, if they attempt to get the 
job done frequently, if they are currently unsatisfied, if they currently spend considerable time and money trying to 
get the job done, if they would be willing to spend significantly to get the job done perfectly, and if the job will be 
around for years to come. With this basic information, a company is able to size a new or emerging market. For 
example, if 6 million people execute a job once a week and are willing to spend $20 each time to get the job done 
perfectly, then the addressable market is approximately (6,000,000) * (1*52) * ($20) = $6.24 billion per year. 
Once a company has determined that a market is attractive from a revenue-producing perspective, it can evaluate the 
market’s attractiveness along other dimensions, such as the degree to which job executors are unsatisfied and the 
organization’s ability to create a valued solution, sustain a market leadership position, and limit organizational risk. 
This approach to market selection differs markedly from the way companies typically select a market. It is not 
uncommon, for instance, for companies to generate a product idea before the market selection exercise is even 
contemplated. What we are suggesting is that a company should decide upon the market it wants to pursue 
first and only then start thinking about ideas that address needs in that market. This will keep the company from 
wasting time and resources creating, prototyping, and testing product or service concepts for markets that are not 
attractive targets to begin with. Deciding What Markets to Pursue 
A New Perspective on Strategy  6Once a company has selected its market, it must 
determine what unmet customer needs to satisfy (and 
with what combination of products and services) so 
that it can achieve and sustain a unique and valued 
competitive position. Deciding what unmet needs 
to target and how to satisfy them for purposes of 
positioning and competitive advantage is the heart of strategy formulation. Ultimately, the price that a company is 
able to charge, its costs, and its ability to differentiate are all derived from this process. 
Before a company can devise a product portfolio strategy for a select market, it must understand the job the 
customer is trying to get done, uncover all the needs associated with getting the job done, and determine which 
of those needs are unmet. 
To understand the job the customer is trying to get done, a company must create a job map. A job map describes 
in detail not what the customer is doing, but rather the job the customer is trying to get done.6 The job map 
serves as a framework for capturing all the metrics that customers use to measure the successful execution of the 
job. These metrics are the customers’ desired outcomes, the detailed components of the customers’ needs, which 
the company must understand before it can begin devising solutions to help customers get the job done better. 
The job map also serves as a framework to define other, related jobs that customers may want to get done, thus 
enabling companies to devise solutions that help customers get those jobs done as well. Customer needs, when 
defined as jobs and outcomes, are the basic units of competitive advantage.7 
Once the company has a complete set of customer needs in hand, it must conduct quantitative research to 
determine the degree to which each need is unmet. This will show the degree to which the market is under- or 
overserved and which needs in particular should be addressed to achieve a unique and valuable competitive 
position.8 Then the company is ready to devise its product portfolio strategy. 
6  See Lance Bettencourt and Anthony Ulwick, “The Customer-Centered Innovation Map,” Harvard Business Review 86, no. 5  (May 2008), 
109–14, for a detailed discussion of the job map and how to create it. 
7  Anthony W. Ulwick and Lance Bettencourt, “Giving Customers a Fair Hearing,” explains how job and outcome statements should be 
structured and how they are captured. The methodology surfaces all needs, including those that have traditionally been thought to be latent 
and those that customers struggle to articulate.
8  A complete set of needs typically consists of between 50 and 150 outcome statements describing how the job executor measures success 
when getting the job done and between 25 and 75 related job statements describing the other jobs the job executor is trying to get done 
relative to the core functional job. Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
Deciding what unmet needs to target and 
how to satisfy them for purposes of 
positioning and competitive advantage is the 
heart of strategy formulation.
A New Perspective on Strategy  79  A company can also grow a market by expanding its presence into other geographies, through mergers and acquisitions, and through other 
activities. The six growth paths introduced here, however, are the primary options a company has at its disposal when it comes to achieving 
organic growth through innovation. In other words, product innovation is conceived within this framework.
10  We define “platform” as the subsystems that deliver the core product or service, enabling the customer to get the job of interest done, 
and the infrastructure that enables the subsystems to work together. For a product, the system infrastructure may consist of materials, the 
subsystem interconnections, the energy source, and the product’s size and shape, while core mechanical, electrical, chemical, and/or software 
components would be considered subsystems. For a service, the system infrastructure may include core physical assets such as trucks and 
buildings and other resources such as people, information, organizational structure, software, communication systems, and the like.
11  See the Bosch CS20 circular saw case study for more details on Bosch’s successful entry into the North American circular saw market. The 
case study can be downloaded at www.strategyn.com. The six growth paths 
When deciding what unmet needs to target and how to satisfy them for purposes of positioning and competitive 
advantage, a company must know what options it has to choose from. Traditionally, when devising a portfolio 
strategy, companies must choose between low-cost and differentiated strategies, between sustaining and 
disruptive strategies, and between core-market and adjacent-market strategies. 
But how does a company know when to choose one over the other? How does it know when more than one 
strategy should be pursued? We have discovered that there are six primary growth paths that explain how a 
market evolves through a series of innovations, often over a period of years.9 With this knowledge and this 
framework, a company can position itself on each of the growth paths, thereby achieving market leadership, 
profitability, and a market position that can withstand competitive attacks. 
The growth paths are derived from three questions that a company must ask about each market it wants to 
pursue: Should the focus be on the core job the customer is trying to get done or on the core job plus related 
jobs the customer is trying to get done? Should new features be added to the current product platform or is a 
new product platform required?10 Finally, should a product be created for the traditional job executor or a new job 
executor? The framework resulting from this set of variables is shown in Figure 1. Whether one or all six growth 
paths should be pursued depends on what unmet needs exist in the market and what it will take to address them. 
Let’s look at each growth path in turn. 
Growth Path 1:  When customers struggle to get a job done and it is technically possible to devise a feature 
set that will address those unmet needs on the current product platform, then a company should pursue the 
core- or sustaining-market growth strategy. A company that adopts this strategy must choose which underserved 
(insufficiently satisfied) outcomes to target and add a set of features to the core platform that will address those 
outcomes, enabling the current job executor to get the core job done better. When the Robert Bosch Tool 
Company created the award winning CS20 circular saw, for example, they applied this strategy after uncovering 
and targeting 14 underserved outcomes in this seemingly mature market. Because they were able to devise 
a feature set that addressed each outcome, they were able to enter the North American circular saw market 
successfully in 2005 and capture a dominant position—a position they still hold today.11 Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
A New Perspective on Strategy  812  See the Microsoft Software Assurance case study for more details on how Microsoft’s Software Assurance business used this methodology to 
successfully turn around and grow this market. The case study can be downloaded at www.strategyn.com. Growth Path 2:  Sometimes, when performing the core job, the job executor also wants to get other jobs done, 
but is not able to do so easily. In this case, a company should pursue the related-market growth strategy. This 
strategy requires a company to add new features to the current product platform to help the current job executor 
get other, related jobs done. Microsoft, for example, learned that IT professionals not only wanted operating 
system upgrade rights (the core job), they also wanted to deploy new operating systems, train employees on 
software upgrades, and prevent internal security violations. Microsoft adopted the related-market growth strategy, 
improving their Software Assurance offering to help customers get these additional jobs done. Between 2004 and 
2008, Microsoft was able to substantially grow the Software Assurance business and dramatically increase annual 
renewal rates.12 
Figure 1. The Six-Growth-Path Framework 
+ Related Jobs2.  Related-market Growth  
Add a set of features to the core 
platform to help customers get a 
related job or jobs done.4.  Related-market Convergence  
Construct a feature set on a new 
platform to help customers get  
a job or group of related jobs 
done better.6.  Disrupted-market 
Convergence  
Add a set of features to the new 
platform to help new customers 
get a related job or jobs done.Core Job(s)1.  Core- or Sustaining-market 
Growth  
Add a set of features to the core 
platform to help customers get a 
core job or jobs done better.3.  Core-platform Disruption  
Construct a feature set on a new 
platform to help customers get 
a core job or jobs done cheaper 
and/or better.5.  Core-market Disruption  
Construct a feature set on a 
new platform to enable new 
customers to perform the core job 
of a specialist.
Core Platform New Platform
Current Job Executor New Executor
Pursuing either the core- or related-market growth strategy will not work if there are no underserved desired 
outcomes or jobs, respectively. Adding more features to the core platform in those cases will only serve to add 
product cost, not desired function. People carrying out the job of shaving, for example, feel well served by the 
number of blades in a razor, so razor manufacturers who continue to add more blades to a razor are merely 
increasing the cost without addressing an underserved outcome. Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
A New Perspective on Strategy  9Growth Path 3:  If unmet needs cannot be satisfied 
on the core platform and there are no other jobs that 
customers want to get done, a company should pursue 
the core-platform disruption strategy. This strategy 
requires that a company create a new platform and a 
new feature set that will help the current job executor 
get the core job done better. Flat-screen television, for 
example, created a new platform and a new feature set that supplanted cathode ray tube television, satisfying 
a number of unmet customer needs. Not only did flat-screen television disrupt the cathode ray tube television 
market, but at the same time it replaced a commodity with a product that produced higher margins and higher 
profits. This disproves the notion that disruption (a new platform and business model) always leads to a lower-
margin business. Disruption, however, does lead to a lower-margin business when a market is overserved (there 
are no unmet needs), though we find such markets account for less than 5% of those we have studied. In those 
rare cases, a company should still pursue the core-platform disruption strategy, but it must create a new platform 
that will significantly lower product cost while continuing to help customers get the job done. In the steel industry, 
this was the strategy that minimills followed, creating a low-cost platform that did certain jobs as well as the more 
expensive platform utilized by traditional steel mills. Once established, the minimills pursued a strategy of helping 
customers get other jobs done (growth path 2), further expanding and strengthening their position. 
Growth Path 4:  In some markets, the job executor wants to get a group of related jobs done, but because 
of technical constraints, the additional jobs cannot be addressed by simply adding features to the current 
platform—a new platform is needed. In such a situation, the company should pursue the related-market 
convergence strategy. This strategy requires that a company create a new platform and a new set of features 
to help the current job executor get a group of related jobs done. It is an effective strategy because helping 
customers get many jobs done (rather than one) is the best way to create customer value and a high-margin 
business. The idea is to converge the execution of many jobs on a single platform. This is the strategy that Apple 
used in plotting its success with the iPod. In that situation, for example, people didn’t want only to listen to music, 
they also wanted to acquire music, create playlists, organize their music libraries, and share music with friends—all 
jobs that were not and could not be addressed with MP3 technology alone. A new platform was needed. Apple 
combined iTunes with the iPod, creating a new product/service platform that enabled customers to get these and 
other jobs done. The success of this well-executed strategy has bolstered Apple’s market position, not to mention 
its stock price. The company has used the same strategy to make the iPhone a success. Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
If unmet needs cannot be satisfied on the 
core platform and there are no other jobs 
that customers want to get done, a company 
should pursue the core-platform disruption 
strategy.
A New Perspective on Strategy  10Growth Path 5 : In some markets, we find that the 
person executing the core job is executing it on behalf 
of another person, whom we call the job beneficiary. 
Providers of services often fall into this category. For 
example, nurses perform jobs that benefit patients, as 
do dentists, chiropractors, and doctors. Similarly, consultants perform jobs that benefit companies. When these 
sorts of markets are appropriately or overserved, a company should follow a core-market disruption strategy. This 
means that the company must help a new job executor get the core job done using a new value delivery platform. 
P&G, for example, pursed this strategy when it released Crest Whitestrips, taking the job of whitening teeth away 
from the dentist and putting it in the hands of the individual—a new job executor. P&G also pursued this strategy 
with Dryell, a product that took the job of dry cleaning clothes away from the traditional dry cleaner and put it 
in the hands of the individual. Many consulting firms apply this strategy when they teach their clients to execute 
tasks that a consultant would normally perform for them. It is a natural evolution in many markets for the job 
beneficiary to eventually become the job executor. 
This strategy is less likely to work when the market is underserved, that is, when the current job executor struggles 
to get the job done. This is because if a skilled job executor has trouble getting a job done, it is unlikely that a 
company will be able to devise a new product platform that would make it possible for a new, less-skilled job 
executor to do the job successfully. 
Growth Path 6:  Finally, sometimes a new job executor also has other, related jobs they would like to get done 
in addition to the core job. In this case, a company should pursue the disrupted-market convergence strategy. 
When pursuing this strategy, a company must help a new job executor get the core job and other, related jobs 
done using a new value delivery platform—as P&G did when it improved Crest Whitestrips by adding tartar 
protection, which is a job related to whitening teeth. Panasonic pursued this strategy when it introduced its 
electric massage chair. It replaced the masseuse as the job executor and included features to make it possible 
for the new job executor to get other jobs done as well, such as a reading light and a heated backrest. As this 
example demonstrates, the related jobs that the new job executor wants to get done will likely differ from those 
of the original job executor. Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
It is a natural evolution in many markets for 
the job beneficiary to eventually become the 
job executor.
A New Perspective on Strategy  11Using the Six Growth Paths to Explain Historic Growth 
We have found that markets naturally evolve through this series of six innovation growth paths, often in a 
predictable order. In general, companies try to help customers get jobs done better on existing product platforms, 
then get more jobs done on new platforms. Eventually, the job beneficiary becomes the job executor (if it is not 
that way to begin with), or chooses to acquire the service from a cost-effective supplier. 
Consider the evolution of the music production market. Fifty years ago, musicians had to rely on professionals 
using a magnetic recording device to record a track of music. Laying out multiple tracks, mixing, and other activities 
were performed using multiple pieces of equipment. Over time, these magnetic recorders became sophisticated 
enough to enable professionals to execute some of the other jobs on the recorder (growth path 2, related-market 
growth). Twenty years later, digital devices made their debut and enabled recording professionals to get these jobs 
done more effectively (growth path 3, core-platform disruption). Shortly thereafter, these devices incorporated new 
functions that helped recording professionals get still more jobs done (growth path 4, related-market convergence). 
More recently, home recording studios have become popular. These enable a new job executor (the musician) 
to record music on his or her own (growth path 5, core-market disruption). With the advent of programs such 
as Apple’s GarageBand, musicians can now perform most of the jobs that 20 years ago required the services of 
recording professionals (growth path 6, disrupted-market convergence). 
But it doesn’t always go this smoothly. Consider the newspaper industry. Originally, newspapers targeted people 
(the job executors) who wanted to stay abreast of newsworthy events (the job to be done). Following the 
first growth path, newspapers built themselves around skilled journalists, who obtained and wrote stories of 
interest, and a well-coordinated delivery system, which delivered the news directly to the home. This platform 
served newspapers well for years. Over time, newspapers came to help customers get other jobs done, such as 
looking for employment, buying and selling homes, and selling personal items (growth path 2, related-market 
growth). Helping customers get these jobs done created new revenue streams. Then along came the Internet, 
a new platform that enabled customers to get the core job done better: up-to-date news written by qualified 
journalists from all over the world became available 24 hours a day (growth path 3, core-platform disruption). At 
the same time, organizations such as Monster.com, Craigslist, and various real estate companies created web-
based offerings that helped customers get those critical related jobs done. These companies diverted the revenue 
streams of the newspaper companies, but it didn’t have to happen that way. 
The newspapers have never chosen to follow the fourth growth path (related-market convergence), and failure 
to do so has hurt them gravely. To execute related-market convergence successfully, a newspaper would have to 
find a way to help customers get all the jobs done that a traditional paper helps them get done, plus others—all 
integrated into one platform with a business model that ensures profitability. Such a platform would offer news 
written by credible journalists as well as services such as those delivered by Monster.com, Craigslist, Realestate.
com, Zagat, Wine Spectator, and others. It can still happen. What we have seen develop to date instead are less-
credible journalists writing and distributing news through blogs and through Twitter—a new platform (growth 
path 3, core-platform disruption) that will shape the way we view news until existing newspapers can successfully 
execute a strategy of related-market convergence. Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
A New Perspective on Strategy  12Using the Six Growth Paths to Achieve Future Growth 
Once a company decides to enter a market, it must do everything in its power to own and lead that market. Since 
markets evolve as described above, the most effective strategy is the one that will optimize company profitability 
across all six growth paths. If a company determines that a number of unmet outcomes can be addressed on the 
core platform to help customers get a job done better, than it should pursue a strategy of core-market growth. If it 
is also determined that one or more underserved jobs could be addressed on the core platform, then the related-
market growth strategy should be pursued as well. If, after this, a number of unmet outcomes still remain that 
cannot be addressed on the core platform, then the core-platform disruption strategy should be pursued. If it is 
also determined that a number of highly related but underserved jobs exist that cannot be addressed on the core 
platform, then the company should develop a new platform that makes it possible to execute all the jobs (related-
market convergence). When the job is currently performed for a job beneficiary, then the last two strategies should 
also be pursued (core-market disruption and disrupted-market convergence). 
Strategy, then, is about formulating a plan for growth along all the pathways through which a market will 
inevitably evolve. Failure to take this comprehensive approach will eventually leave the company vulnerable to a 
competitive attack that will likely capture a current or future revenue stream. Only with a focus on the basic units 
of competitive advantage—customer needs—along all growth paths can a company capture and maintain a 
market leadership position.Devising the Product Portfolio Strategy
A New Perspective on Strategy  13After approving an attractive market for pursuit and formulating a product portfolio strategy that will secure a 
sustainable competitive position, a company must next determine the best formula for optimizing profitability. This 
is accomplished by selecting a set of activities that will ensure successful product creation, delivery, and support 
and then devising an effective business model that leverages those choices. 
Deciding which Activities to Pursue, and how 
As stated earlier, activities are what a company performs to enable the satisfaction of customer needs or to create 
and deliver the products and services that satisfy customer needs. They are enablers of competitive advantage. 
Consequently, before deciding how to execute an activity, a company must determine which activities are key to 
its success. 
Activities may be customer facing or internal facing. We define the customer-facing activities as consumption chain 
jobs. These are the set of jobs that a customer must get done in order to acquire and use a product or service: 
when it comes to a product, the customer must be able to purchase it, receive it, set it up, learn how to use it, 
interface with it, and transport and store it. The customer also must be able to maintain, upgrade, and replace it, 
as well as dispose of it. Services are similar: a customer must be able to acquire, access, set up, learn how to use, 
interact with, maintain and modify, and eventually terminate the service. Which of these jobs the customer will 
have to execute will depend on the product concept that the company has chosen to develop. Preferably, none 
will be required. Realistically, some of the jobs may pose a challenge; the company will then have to determine 
how to meet those challenges. Competitive advantage can be gained by outperforming a competitor in executing 
one or more consumption chain jobs.
Internal-facing activities are generally supply chain activities. For a product, they may include the regulation of 
natural resources, raw material extraction, purchasing, the production of components and subassemblies, final 
assembly, logistics and distribution, storage, and delivery to the point of purchase. For services, internal-facing 
activities may include those just mentioned and more. A company must also decide how each of these activities is 
to be carried out effectively and profitably given the product or service concept that is to be delivered. Here again, 
competitive advantage can be gained by outperforming a competitor in the execution of these jobs. Optimizing Profitability
A New Perspective on Strategy  14Formulating the Business Model 
Once the company has decided how it will execute each pertinent customer-facing and internal-facing activity, 
it must formulate its business model. The business model states how the company will generate revenue from 
its concept offering and control costs through its operations to produce profitability. A solid business model will 
leverage both the value created by the product or service and the way the selected consumption and supply chain 
jobs are to be executed. It is likely that different business models will be required to optimize profitability for each 
of the six growth paths. 
In order to optimize profitability, a company must maximize its revenue and minimize variable and fixed costs. 
For example, a company that conceives the idea of a tooth-cleaning chewing gum may decide to minimize its 
costs by insisting that the supplier providing it with the chemical for dissolving food particles provides the needed 
ingredient in a directly processable form, thus avoiding additional processing costs and investment in capital 
equipment. The company may decide to maximize revenue by selling the gum to restaurants as an eloquent 
alternative to the toothpick, in addition to selling to consumers through typical channels. These cost and revenue 
decisions are two elements of the company’s business model and explain how this product can make money for 
the company. 
Companies can reduce variable costs in a number of ways. They may for example, pass a cost on to the customer, 
a supplier, or a distributor; outsource inefficiently executed activities; own the infrastructure, not the content; 
obtain supplies, materials, or labor for free; use barter; turn a cost or waste into a revenue; or make a variable cost 
fixed. Companies can increase revenue if they are able to take a revenue source from someone else in the value 
chain; sell by-products such as waste, information, or energy; collect revenue at a different frequency; accept 
a noncash form of payment or a nontraditional form of ownership; or add a buying-related or support-related 
revenue source. 
For example, when constructing the iPod/iTunes offering, Apple leveraged the concept of owning the 
infrastructure, not the content when it established its proprietary file format and created iTunes to enable the 
distribution of the content. It leveraged the concept of collecting revenue at a different frequency when it freed 
buyers to purchase individual songs. In this case, as in most successful business models, the business model 
leveraged a product or service platform that addressed unmet needs and the activities that were selected to 
support that product’s creation and delivery. Optimizing Profitability
A New Perspective on Strategy  15An effective strategy will produce a product or service that customers will buy. Strategy formulation includes 
targeting the right market (job executor and job) and devising an offering that addresses a carefully chosen set of 
unmet customer needs. In addition, it includes plans to address all pertinent consumption chain jobs and carefully 
structuring and effectively executing supply chain jobs. Finally, it requires a business model that maximizes revenue 
while minimizing costs. The entire process of strategy formulation becomes much clearer when customer needs 
(not activities) are considered the basic units of competitive advantage. 
Three Views of Strategy
The first two views are taken from Michael Porter’s “What is Strategy” article. The third view, outcome-driven 
strategy, is the perspective described in this article. 
1. Implicit Strategy Model 2.  Sustainable Competitive Advantage 3.  Outcome-Driven Strategy
One ideal competitive position to 
the industry Benchmarking of all 
activities
Benchmarking of all activities and 
achieving best practiceUnique competitive position for the 
company 
Activities tailored to strategyUnique competitive position for each 
product or service the company offers
Activities are tailored to optimally 
execute the required consumption 
chain and supply chain jobs
Aggressive outsourcing and 
partnering to gain efficiencies
Advantages rest on a few key 
success factors, critical resources, 
core competencies
Flexibility and rapid responses to all 
competitive and market changes
Operational effectiveness is often 
mistaken for strategyClear trade-offs and choices vis-à-vis 
competitors
Competitive advantage arises from fit 
across activities
Sustainability comes from the activity 
system, not the parts
Operational effectiveness is a given positionDevelop the capabilities that are 
needed to create and sustain a market 
position
Competitive advantage arises from 
selecting what unmet needs to target 
and finding the best ways to address 
them
Sustainability comes from an ability to 
execute growth strategies across all six 
growth paths
Operational effectiveness must be tied 
to activities that satisfy unmet needs
 A New Perspective
A New Perspective on Strategy  16
Accelerated growth. Delivered.™
Strategyn®  & Outcome-Driven Innovation® are covered by U.S. and other foreign registered trademarks of Strategyn Holdings LLC.  The Outcome Driven 
Innovation Process is covered by many issued and pending U.S. patents.Contacts
About the Author
Anthony W. Ulwick is the founder and CEO of Strategyn, an innovation consulting firm 
based in San Francisco, California. He is the author of What Customers Want (McGraw-
Hill, 2005),“ Turn Customer Input into Innovation” (Harvard Business Review, January 
2002), “The Customer-Centered Innovation Map (Harvard Business Review, May 2008), 
and “Giving Customers a Fair Hearing” (MITSloan Management Review, Spring 2008). 
He can be contacted at ulwick@strategyn.com. 
Contacts 
United States
Tony Ulwick
CEO & Founder  
Strategyn
ulwick@strategyn.com
+1 415 787 2706
EMEA
Petr Salz
Director of Business 
Development
psalz@strategyn.com 
+31 40 2261800France & Italy
Maurizio Beltrami
Managing Partner
maurizio.beltrami@strategyn.
com
+41 79 596 34 27
Germany, Austria & 
Switzerland
Martin Pattera
Managing Partner
martin.pattera@strategyn.com 
+43 7472 65510 121
