  
A Method of Extracting Organizational Components for 
Aligning Information Technology with Business 
 
Azmat Ullah*1, Richard Lai2 
1 La Trobe University, School of Business, Melbourne, Vic. 3086, Australia. 
2 La Trobe University, Department of Computer Science and Information Technology , Melbourne, Vic. 3086, 
Australia. 
 
* Corresponding author. Email: A.Ullah@latrobe.edu.au ; lai@cs.latrobe.edu.au 
Manuscript submitted January 10, 2018; accepted March 8, 2018. 
 
 
Abstract : Structuring a good working relationship between business and information technology (IT) is 
synonymous with structuring good alignment. Alignment refers to the degree of fit between business and IT 
to reach a common business goal. However, it has long been accepted that establishing strong alignment is a 
complex task due to a lack of information on how organizational components can be extracted. 
Organizations consist of key components such as model, strategy, operations, processes etc. Processes in 
business operations are stable key elements which need to be well managed and fit optimally with the 
proposed business strategy and other related organizational activities. This paper presents a method of 
extracting organizational components for the purpose of achieving better Business/IT alignment and 
describes how we have applied it to a medical inventory system. Successful business process extraction will 
typically provide information for the following: what needs to be included in the process; why businesses 
need a process; who the process stakeholders are; how to implement the process; and how well an 
Information System (IS) supports its business process. 
 
Key words : business process extraction, business process modeling , IS requirements, business-IT 
alignment, IS development, bubble diagram. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Over the past several years, researchers have paid an increasing amount of attention to the importance of 
alignment between business and Information Technology (IT). Alignment can be defined as the optimized 
synchronization between dynamic business objectives and respective technological support by IT . 
Successful alignment may result in better business performance for the organization [16], [17]. However, 
achieving strong alignment has long been regarded as a complicated task by alignment researchers and 
business executives[18], as alignment is an adaptive method within the firm rather than an event, requiring 
an ongoing effort of long term business process planning, the reengineering of business goals/objectives, 
and business process formulation that supports and shapes the system requirements. Consequently, 
business process management is required. 
Business process management (BPM) is a standard to manage and to improve business processes in 
organizations. The term BPM might be new but the concept of business process has a rich history. It first 
originated in Fredrick Taylor’s theories of scientific management that appeared in the early 1920s [4]. Ever 
since, scholars have studied the issue of BPM in organizations which has resulted in the availability of Journal of Software
374 Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018doi: 10.17706/jsw.13. 7.374-385
  
different BPM techniques today such as [2] , [7]-[15]: business process modeling, business process 
reengineering, business performance management, workflow, six sigma, etc. After a comprehensive 
literature survey on the issue of alignment and BPM, we believe that the concept of extracting business 
processes and business process modeling in the context of alignment has not been previously studied in 
great depth. Only a few researchers have examined the business process modeling issue [1-3, 29], but, so far, 
there is no published work on business process extraction from the perspective of alignment between 
business and IT [18].   
Extracting business processes in alignment research is the art of discovering business processes in depth, 
which includes: firstly, who the process stakeholders are, which client will be paying for the implementation 
of the process, which users will interact with the process, and which developers will implement the process. 
It secondly examines why business needs processes including business goals and objectives. Thirdly, where 
a process is going to be used, it discovers the business organization environment. Fourthly, when business 
needs a process, it discovers the process development timeframe. Therefore, the in-depth extraction of 
business processes is required prior to deriving the system requirements from the process and to develop 
the Information Systems (IS) [19]-[ 21], [18].  
This paper presents a method of extracting organizational components for the purpose of achieving 
better Business/IT alignment and describes how we have applied it to a medical inventory system. 
Successful business process extraction will typically provide information for the following: what needs to be 
included in the process; why businesses need a process; who the process stakeholders are; how to 
implement the process; and how well the IS supports the business process.    
2. The Context of our Work  
In this paper we model the business environment for better alignment between business and information 
technology. This section summarized the key concepts used in this research: the business process modelling 
and alignment.  
2.1. Business Process Modeling  
Processes in business operations are stable key elements which need to be well managed and fit 
optimally with the proposed business strategy and other related organizational activities. In other words, a 
business process is basically a standardized approach to convert a set of user inputs into a design output, 
for instance, a loan application at a bank, as shown in Figure 1, where a customer applies for a bank loan via 
an electronic application form. This information becomes the input into the loan application process. The 
bank process, at this stage, consists of several important pillars such as a credit check, customer details, 
technological support and other activities to enable the bank to make a decision as to whether to approve 
the loan or not. The output of the bank process is the decision that is communicated to the customer.  
Business process extraction in the field of process management is the art of discovering the process 
stakeholders and all the processes, including the goals, which motivate the development of a software 
system that fulfills the proposed process implementation. A process stakeholder is an individual or 
organization that will either gain or lose from the success or failure of a software system, such as clients 
who pay for the development of the process, users who interact with the system to do their work, and 
developers who implement and maintain the system. Stakeholders who are clients and users play a pivotal 
role in the extraction of business process, as usability can only be defined in terms of the location where the 
process is going to be used and in terms of the targeted user population. Moreover, the method of 
identifying goals within the process focuses the system analysts on the process problem domain and the 
needs of the stakeholders rather than on solutions to those problems. Clients often have difficulties 
articulating their business process. Therefore, it is the IS analyst’s responsibility to identify information 
Journal of Software
375
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
about the goals that the clients currently use in the process and those they might want to include in the 
process.  
Business process modeling is referred to as a collection of techniques and methodologies that are used to 
model the system’s behavior and its requirements. In other words, process modeling is a language which is 
used to identify organizational goals that need to be achieved. The language is derived from a modeling 
language known as the Extended Enterprise Modeling Language (EEML). It is a useful technique by which to 
capture, clarify and link the business goals of an organization. Linking goals within the business process is a 
complex task, as one business process can carry more than one goal, as shown in Figure 3. Therefore, it is 
important that every goal within the business process is explored and linked with others for better 
clarification of the process. To model the business process, we used business process modeling notation 
(BPMN). The language was developed by the business process management initiative group and is widely 
accepted by business analysts and business process researchers [22].  
 
Application 
formTechnology
Accept input
People Processes
Process inputProvide output
Customer InputLoan 
Type 
Loan 
Guideline Bank 
policies  Accept 
Loan
Bank OutputReject 
Loan
Document 
missing Apply 
again
Bank Infrastructure 
 
Fig. 1. How the business process works. 
 
2.2. Business-IT Alignment   
The notion of alignment refers to the optimized synchronization between dynamic business objectives 
and respective technological support by IT . However, attaining successful alignment between IT and 
business is always a critical process, as pointed out by business executives and managers. The concept first 
appeared in the early 1970s and since then, researchers have tried to understand the issue by studying 
various organizational factors. Using early techniques, alignment researchers struggled to address the issue 
through linking the business plan with the information technology plan. However, these techniques were ad 
hoc, given the level of dissatisfaction in organizations regarding their respective IT departments. The 
principal disadvantage of early techniques was the way the business and IT structure was planned. Early on, 
planning was only divided into top-down and bottom-up processes, for example, on the business side, 
planning was sub-divided into different departments such as HRM, finance, marketing, IT etc., and on the 
information technology side, the structure was divided into hardware and software, to establish the link 
between business and information technology [23-24]. These theories have expanded over time and 
nowadays, researchers point out many issues and have proposed various suitable alignment models and 
approaches.  
Moreover, alignment can be examined from different perspectives representing different organizational 
factors such as:  structure [25], culture [26], strategy [27], and social aspects [28]. In relation to the 
organization’s structure, scholars considered complex structures, and quick changes in structure. In relation 
to the organization’s culture, they examined la ck of communication, weak relationships and lack of IT belief 
within the organization. In relation to the organization’s strategic directions, factors such as formal business 
Journal of Software
376
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
and formal IT strategy were considered in terms of alignment. In relation to the social aspect of the 
organization, factors such as a lack of shared domain knowledge, a lack of IT knowledge in the business 
department and a lack of business knowledge in the IT department were considered. Further to the 
alignment concept overview, alignment can be categorized into different phases, where every phase 
represents a precise part of the organization, such as internal or external phase, department phase, project 
phase etc. In the external phase, the organization is aligned with the business partner organizations 
including customers, traders, competitors etc. In the internal phase of alignment, the organization’s 
departments are alignment with each other. This kind of alignment could be organization phase alignment, 
department phase alignment, business project phase alignment, system development phase alignment etc. 
3. Related Work  
The label of BPM might be new, but the concept has a rich history. Literature shows that scholars 
developed the theory of BPM in three separate waves. The concept first o riginated in Fredrick Taylor’s 
theories on scientific management that appeared in the early 1920s.  At this time, the business process 
was standardized rather than automated and processes were implicit in work practices [4]. The second 
wave of business process management was developed by Michael Hammer and James Champy in the 1990s, 
where business processes were starting to be automated through enterprise resource planning (ERP) and 
various other standards of the systems [5]. Recently, Smith and Fingar introduced the third wave of process 
management, where business processes are considered the essential hub and fundamental building block of 
all automation and business systems. In this wave, organizations focus on change, particularly on how to 
apply changes to business processes, when business staff lack IT knowledge [6]. Moreover, in the third wave 
of process management, scholars studied several other related concepts as follows: Business Process 
Modeling [7]-[9], Business Process Reengineering [10], [11], Business Change Management [14], Business 
Performance Management [12], [13], Six Sigma [15], Workflow [2] etc.  
After a comprehensive literature survey on the issue of Business-IT alignment and conducting a survey 
on BPM, we believe that the concept of business process extraction and business process modeling in the 
context of alignment has not been previously studied in great depth. Only a few researchers have examined 
the business process modeling issue, collectively producing a good deal of work such as EKD, goal-based 
workflow, goal-based business process models and requirements engineering approach for IT-Business 
alignment [1, 2, 3, 33]. However, to date, there has been no published work on business process extraction 
from the perspective of alignment between business and IT . Enterprise Knowledge Patterns (EKD) is the 
language used in the requirements engineering analysis phase to model the business processes, for example, 
what needs to be included in the proposed process and how to link goals within the process. The technique 
is composed of several sub- models such as: business role model, process model, goal model, actor’s model, 
resource model, etc. The method of goal-based workflow suggests a business process modeling 
infrastructure for system requirements engineering in regard to clarifying the organizational 
goals/objectives and to understanding the current organizational situation. The business process-driven 
requirements engineering approach is a technique to derive the system’s requirements from th e 
organizational model by means of business process modeling, where two stakeholders participate, 
including: BPMN to link the business and IT processes and the goal tree to model the business process in a 
way that is easy for IT to understand. Recently, we [29] presented a business process driven requirements 
engineering approach for IT to better understand system requirements, as requirements are automatically 
generated from the business process and provide assistance to obtain the systems requirements quickly. 
The approach guarantees the development of an IT system that effectively fulfills the needs of the business, 
which positively influences the process of IT-Business alignment.  
Journal of Software
377
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
However, these approaches have several drawbacks. First and foremost, the existing approaches assume 
that a business process is in place before modeling occurs. This raises a very basic question: how can we 
perform best business process modeling if the processes are not well extracted [18]. Consequently, business 
process extraction which clearly defines the following information: what the process is all about; what 
needs to be included in the process; why businesses need a process; who are the process stakeholders; how 
to implement the process etc, is important before modeling it. Second, they do not provide adequate 
information on business processes, as one business process is a combination of different sub-processes or 
goals that need to be explored in order to analyze the business process completely.  
4. The Method  
Organizations have their own unique way of conducting business and these unique ways are captured in 
the business processes of the organization. The processes in the business are primary elements of 
organizational success. However, although effectively managing business processes is a key activity for 
business prosperity, there remains huge gaps in understanding how to drive business efficiency through a 
process approach. Building a comprehensive and clear understanding of business processes, how they 
function, and how to manage them remain key issues in modern businesses. To overcome these issues in 
business processes, senior management invests a huge part of the company’s budget in information 
technology resources because they believe the method of organizing business processes suffers due to poor 
IT support. This raises a fundamental question underlying these conversions: how can an IT department 
actually help business to implement their processes if they lack information on process extraction and 
process modeling.     
 
 
 Leadership
 
 
Resources
 
 
Objectives
 
 Strategy
 
 
Aims
 
 Fulfillment 
 
 Quality
 
 
Goal
 
 
Awareness
 
 Target
 
 Process
 map
 
 
Processes
 
 Role
 model
 
 
Activity 
model
 
 
Resource model 
 
Purpose
 
 
Stakeholder
 
 Timeframe 
 
 
Process
triage
 
 
Modeling 
 
Strategy
 
 Organization
 
 
InfrastructureBPM 
(process 
extraction)
 
Fig. 2. The method. 
 
The aims of this method are twofold: firstly, to extract the business process which includes: what 
problems need to be solved in the process?; how to identify the process and system boundaries?; who is the 
Journal of Software
378
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
process stakeholder?; why processes need to be implemented?; and where is the process going to be used?; 
and secondly, to identify the process in detail and establish a process hierarchy including goals, which is 
known as business process modeling. This planned method can be divided into two: the extraction of the 
overall enterprise, and the extraction and modeling business process, as shown in Figure 2. Part 1 describes 
the specifications of the overall enterprise, which consist of the specification of three major components: 
the organization, the business strategy, and the business infrastructure. All these components must be in 
concordance to assure IT-Business alignment. The extraction concept for part 1 of the method is based on 
the bubble diagram and our previous work [18].  Part 2 depicts the way to extract the business process in 
detail, which is known as process extraction. Part 2 is divided into three stages. Stage 1 extracts the 
business process in the form of a mission statement of the process (purpose); who is the stakeholder of the 
process (stakeholder)?; and when the process is required (timeframe)? Stage 2 analyzes the business 
process in the form of process triage. Stage 3 describes the way to model the business process in order to 
identify all included goals within the selected business process and established hierarchy among them. 
4.1. Extraction of Enterprise Architecture   
Organizational architecture is defined as a design or a description that develops clear associations 
between the company product, company processes, services, and information technological infrastructure, 
in context with a complete definition of the organization. The term ‘organization’ refers to the group of 
people who formally work together to achieve the business goals and objectives. The business goals and 
objectives cannot be accomplished individually; therefore, the organization infrastructure needs to be 
formed. Generally, scholars divide the concept of organization into two types: formal, which represents 
organizations which have legal and official recognition; and informal which are used to represent the 
private part of the organization. The method extracts the organizational environment by means of 
organizational aims, objectives, leadership, resources, and organizational strategy. The organizational aims 
and objectives are used to map long and short range business goals, which are the goals that help to achieve 
the organizational mission statement. Leadership represents the process in which one or more persons use 
the employee workforce to accomplish organizational tasks. Resources describe the organizational rules 
and regulations, and finally the business strategy is used to present the organizational plans.        
Strategy is a long or short term plan of action in the business that aims to achieve a particular goal or set 
of goals. Defining and extracting a business strategy is always a difficult task for business executives and 
managers. As a consequence, various techniques such as [16, 31-32], have appeared in the literature in 
order to support business strategy definition, strategy modeling, and extraction of strategy. In the second 
stage of the method, business strategy has been extracted by means of organizational scope (aims); who are 
your customers and what are their needs (strategic target and goals); are the customers aware of the 
company product (awareness); how to evaluate the strategy (fulfillment); and how to maintain company 
achievements in the market (quality).  
Business infrastructure guarantees the appropriate synchronization of human resources, finances, 
processes and all other operational tools that are necessary to ensure manageable, profitable growth. Once 
the organizational environment and the business strategy have been extracted, the method extracts the 
business infrastructure, as shown in Fig. 2, comprising a role model, process map, activity model, processes, 
and a resource model. A role model is a standard model that is used to measure the organizational actors’ 
roles and responsibilities, where each role defines a set of activities within the process. In the process map, 
we introduced a further three sub-models: the business strategy process, which defines the managerial 
scope and organizational planning; the operative process, which is used to create a link between product 
development and service provision; and the support process which identifi es the organizational resources 
and their measurement. The activity model represents the organizational activities that have been used to 
Journal of Software
379
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
work with partner organizations including clients, dealers, competitors etc. The process model is used to 
define a complete and dynamically synchronized set of mutual and transactional activities that bring value 
for the consumers. Finally, the resource model presents the most vital notions of the organizational domain 
that are used within processes, such as rules and regulations.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Process of medical inventory system in a medical company. 
 
4.2. Business Process Management  
Business process management (BPM) is the method used to tie together all organizational elements to 
ensure a successful business environment within the organization. Moreover, BPM is a management 
practice that provides support to companies in order to model, organize, and optimize their business 
processes for significant growth. A number of techniques have appeared in the literature to manage the 
business processes [2] , [4]-[15], but problems still exist due to rapid changes in the business environment, 
particularly in relation to changes in consumer services, technologies and product lifecycles. To overcome 
these issues, organizations continuously update their business processes in response to market demand; for 
example, in the 60s, the predominant organizational concentration was to produce quantity, in the 70s to 
produce low cost products, in the 80s to produce quality products, in the 90s to produce products in less 
time, and in the 21st century, the organizational process has changed towards offering more services [30]. 
This proposed method covers two issues of the business process management: firstly, how to identify the 
business process that describes the stakeholder’s needs?; and secondly, how to model the business process 
in order to identify all the sub-processes within the selected business process and establish a hierarchy 
among the identified processes?   
4.2.1.  Process extraction   
Journal of Software
380
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
To extract the business process, the proposed method uses the concept of the bubble diagram. A bubble 
diagram is a tool that many business and IT analysts use in the very first phase of the design process. It 
provides an easy way of identifying the business process including goals as well the connections between 
them. An inventory control system in a medical company has been used as case study, as shown in Figure 3, 
which is implemented using a bubble diagram. The primary goal of the medical company is the 
development of the system that maintains information about activities within firms such as: guaranteeing 
the delivery of products to consumers, sales, warehousing, ordering, manufacturing, and receiving. The 
company process has been divided into five phases where each phase describes the process, including goals. 
The goals and their activities are presented in the form of bubbles. In the first phase, we identify the process 
involving stakeholders and company rules and regulations in the form of “about company” which illustrates 
the company policies, service, history etc and “authentication” which describes how the company can 
control the following information: how to manage the validation of user accounts; how to create new user 
accounts; and how to delete existing user account information if required?       
  
Payment
methodSystem
Scan ItemAccounting Cash Exact
change
Card No Return 
cash
Swipe 
cardEnter
pin
Unsuccessful 
Update 
databaseYes
Yes 
Print 
receipt
Receive
orderManage 
item
Track 
itemDatabase/
warehouse 
Purchase 
itemList of 
manufacturers
Advanced 
search Make 
order
Save
searchOrder 
complete 
System 
securitySupport 
security tools
Other threatsSecurity 
ensured 
Login Verify 
Deny access False Display 
choices True Add item Enter detail
Select item Delete item
Select item Modify itemStart scan 
itemNew account
Modify 
menu Sales
Warehouse 
Purchase 
Security 
Administration 
Task Gateway Start activity End activity Legend Try again
Purchasing Security Save listFailed 
 
Fig. 4. Identification of business goals in the process. 
Journal of Software
381
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
Payment
methodSystem
Scan ItemCalculate 
BillAccounting Check 
paymentCash Exact
change
Card No Return 
cash
Swipe 
cardEnter
pin
Unsuccessful 
Update 
databseYes
Yes 
Print 
receipt Inform
warehousePrint
bill
Receive
orderManage 
item
Track 
itemManage Database/
warehouse Update & 
search item  
Purchase 
itemList of 
manufacturers
Advanced 
search Find 
manufacturer Make 
orderFailed 
Save
searchOrder 
complete 
System 
securitySupport 
security tools
Other threatsSecurity 
methods Security 
ensured Make the system 
secure
Login Access 
system
Enter 
passwardVerify 
Deny access False Display 
choices True Add item Enter detail
Select item Delete item
Select item Modify itemStart scan 
itemNew account
Modify 
menu Sales
Warehouse 
Purchase 
Security 
Administration Save list
Try againCalculate factors
Include info
Backup 
Task Gateway Start activity End activity Legend Update item information
Accept new order
Database 
is secure
System is secure
Try 
againSave
 information
Purchasing Security Accept item
Order new 
stock
Make system 
secure
 
Fig. 5. Process modeling. 
 
In phase 2, security in the form of CCTV and checkpoint alarm support as well as security threats such as 
human error, system failure etc, have been authenticated. In phase 3, we identify point of sale-related 
system features which include: scanning the item, calculating the bill, dealing with the customer’s selected 
payment method, generating the invoice etc. In phase 3, we illustrate that one of the important components 
of a medical inventory system is the creation and maintenance of a sensible, valuable warehousing design. 
The warehouse is where the manager can easily trace an item’s location by using the system, and can easily 
assign the location to the item when a new order arrives. Finally, in phase 5, we identify the purchase of a 
new product component using the inventory system, which contains a list of product manufacturers and 
their product type.  
4.2.2.  Process modeling  
The notion of modeling business processes is used to represent the activities of an enterprise; therefore, 
the process can be analyzed and enhanced. Once the business process has been identified, we use business 
process modeling notation (BPMN) [22] in order to model the process. BPMN was developed by the 
Journal of Software
382
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
business process management initiative group and is widely accepted by business analysts and business 
process researchers. The primary objective of BPMN is to provide standard notations, which are simple and 
easy for developers and other business stakeholders to understand. It uses a standard modeling language to 
bridge the gap between the business model and implementation. The method of modeling the busines s 
process which is shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 is divided into two stages. In stage 1, we model each identified 
goal within the medical inventory process separately, as shown in Figure 4. The first goal of the process is 
sale, where the system scans the customer’s selected item and ca lculates the bill, as well as checking the 
customer’s chosen payment method. If the payment method is accepted, the system automatically updates 
the company’s database and prints the receipt or the system gives an error message of “unsuccessful” if the 
payment method is rejected. 
The second goal of the process is warehousing, where the system is responsible for managing the 
database of the company’s products. It must allow the company to trace t he item within the warehouse as 
well as allowing the company to assign a location in the warehouse to newly arrived items. The third goal of 
the process is purchasing, where the system maintains a list of product manufacturers to enable the 
company to place new orders when there is no stock. The fourth goal of the process is system security, 
where system enables the company to identify the security related tools and provides awareness about 
other security threads such as human error or system failure. Finally, the fifth goal of the process is 
administration, where system secures the company process by providing the login information. When 
administration tries to access the system it asks user name and password. After entering the login 
information system verify it with the database, if it verified system allow admin to access the system 
features otherwise it deny access.          
Once every goal within the business process has been identified, it is important to establish a link 
between the goals in order to construct the whole process in a way that represents the right decomposition 
of the process, including goals, in the right sequence where the process has one start and end point. In stage 
2 of the process modeling, we link each explored goal in Fig. 4 and define a sequence among the goals, as 
shown in Fig. 5. The process in Figure 5 starts from the administration process goal, where the system asks 
for login information to access the system and ends with the process goal of sales, where the system print s 
the receipt. The process at this stage clearly depicts the process, including goals, and exactly what the 
system has to do and how it should do it, which positively influences the development of a successful IT 
system and influences the process of implementing strong business alignment with information technology. 
5. Conclusion  
In this paper, we have presented a business process extraction method in the context of aligning business 
with information technology. The method is based on the bubble diagram and is an extension of our 
previous work [18]. An inventory control system in a medical company was used as a case study in order to 
validate the method. The findings are as follows: (1) business process extraction is possible using a bubble 
diagram; (2) business process extraction and process modeling can positively influence the requirements 
engineering procedure in the IS development lifecycle; (3) the procedure of requirements engineering has a 
direct effect on the implementation of a successful IS; and (4) the implementation of an IS that meets the 
business needs can positively influence alignment between business and IT , as well as positively influence 
the business process.  
Three major implications can be derived from the method for researchers, business analysts, and IS 
analysts. First, for researchers, aligning information technology with business is always a difficult job [18], 
and although researchers have been working on this issue for many years, business executives and 
managers still consider the problem as unsolved and rank it as the top problem of all organizational issues. 
Journal of Software
383
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
This paper introduced a new approach to IT-business alignment, and the method was successfully validated 
when implemented in an inventory control system in a medical company to ensure successful alignment. 
Second, for business analysts, business process extraction and modeling is always a challenging task. This 
method defines a way to extract the business process and to model the business process which is easy for 
business analysts and other business stakeholders to implement. Third, for IS analysts, understanding and 
deriving the IS requirements of the business in context with IT-Business alignment is difficult due to the 
business process complexity, as one business process can carry more than one business goal and every goal 
is linked to each other. Our method defines a way in which the business process has been taken into account 
before commencing the development phase of IS, which has a positive impact on the clarification of th e 
business process and IS requirements among IS staff.        
References 
[1] Bubenko, J. A. P ., & Stirna, J. (2001). EKD User Guide. Retrieved from 
http://www.dsv.su.se/~js/ekd_user_guide.html 
[2] Ellis, C. A. C. A., & Wainer, J . (1994). Goal-based models of collaboration . Collaborative Computing , 1(0), 
61-86. 
[3] Gonzá lez, J. L. D. V., & Juan, S. D. (2007). Business process-driven requirements engineering: a 
goal-based approach.  Proceedings of the  8th Workshop on Business Process Modeling, Development, 
and Support . 
[4] Taylor, F. W. (1911). The principles of scientific management. New York: Harper Bros. 
[5] Hammer, M. & Champy, J. (1993).Reengineering the corporation: A manifesto for business revolution. 
Nicholas Brealey Publishing, London. 
[6] Smith, H., & Fingar,P . (2004). Business process management (BPM) : The third wave.  Journal of 
Information Systems , 22.  
[7] Nurcan, S. E., Kaabi, A., Zoukar, R. I., & Rolland, C. (2005). A strategy driven business process modelling 
approach. Business Process Management Journal , 11(6), 628-649. 
[8] Bider, (2000). Business process modelling —concepts. Proceedings of PBPM’00. 
[9] Eriksson, H ., & Penker, M. (2000).  Business Modeling with UML , Wiley. 
[10] Ranganathan, C., & Dhaliwal, J. S. (2001). A survey of business process reengineering practices in 
Singapore. Information & Management , 39(2), 125 –134. 
[11] Terziovski, M. F. P., & Neill, O. P . (2003). Successful predictors of business process reengineering (BPR) 
in financial services. International Journal of Production Economics , 84(1), 35 –50. 
[12] Burlton, R. (2001). Business Process Management: Profiting From Process , Sams. 
[13] Spanyi, A. (2003). Business Process Management is a Team Sport:  Play it to Win !. Anclote Press Imprint 
of Meghan-Kiffer Press.   
[14] Tripathi, U. K., Hinkelmann, K., & Feldkamp, D. (2008). Life cycl e for change management in business 
processes using semantic technologies . Journal of Computers , 3(1). 
[15] Stamatis, D. H. (2004). Six Sigma Fundamentals: A Complete Guide to The system , Methods, and Tools . 
New York, Productivity Press.  
[16] Becker, A. L., Prikladnicki, R., & Audy, J. L. N. (2009). Strategic alignment of software process 
improvement programs using QFD. Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Business Impact of 
Process Improvements . Leipzig, Germany, 9-14.  
[17] Reich, B. H., & Benbasat, I. (1996). Measuring the linkage between business and information technology 
objectives. MIS Quarterly . 
[18] Ullah, A.. & Lai, R. (2011). Modeling business goal for business/IT alignment using requirements 
Journal of Software
384
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
  
engineering . Journal of Computer Information Systems (USA) , 51(3). 
[19] Christopher, J. P., & Zou, J. (2008). Non-functional requirements in business process modeling . 
Proceedings of the  5th Asia-Pacific Conference on Conceptual Modelling (APCCM2008) . 
[20] Sharp, H. F. A., & Galal, G. (1999). Stakeholder identification in the requirements engineering process. 
Proceedings of the 10th International. Workshop on Database and Expert. Systems Applications . 
[21] Maiden, N ., & Robertson, S. (2005). Integrating creativity into requirements processes: Experiences 
with an air traffic management system. Proceedings of the IEEE International Requirements Engineering 
Conference (RE) . 
[22] White, S. A. (2008). BPMN Modeling and Reference Guide . Future Strategies Inc, USA.  
[23] Henderson, J. C., & Sifonis, J. G. (1988). The value of strategic IS planning: Understanding consistency, 
validity, and IS markets. MIS Quarterly, 12(2), 187 –200. 
[24] McLean, E. R. & Soden, J. V. (1977). Strategic Planning for MIS, New York-Wiley. 
[25] Pollalis, Y. A. (2003). Patterns of co-alignment in information-intensive organizations: business 
performance through integration strategies. International Journal of Information Management , 23(6) , 
469-492. 
[26] Luftman, J. A., Papp, R., & Brier, T . (1999). Enablers and inhibitors of business-IT alignment. 
Communications of the Association of Information Systems , 11(1), 1 –33. 
[27] Kearns, G. S., & Lederer, A. L. (2000). The effect of strategic alignment on the use of IS-based resources 
for competitive advantage . Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 9(4), 265 –293. 
[28] Reich, B. H., & Benbasat, I. (2000). Factors that influence the social dimension of alignment between 
business and information technology objectives. MIS Quarterly , 24(1), 81 –113.  
[29] Ullah, A., & Lai, R. (2010). A requirements engineering approach to improving IT-Business alignment. 
Proceedings of ISD, 19th International Conference on Information Systems Development, Prague, Czech 
Republic: Published in Springer Computer Science Lecture Notes .    
[30] Pandey, M. (2017). Business Process Modelling in Software Requirements Engineering Context.  
[31] Jalali, A., Ouyang, C., Wohed, P ., & Johannesson, P . (2017). Supporting aspect orientation in business 
process management. Software and Systems Modeling , 16(3) , 903-925. 
[32] Dave, B. (2017). Business process management –a construction case study. Construction Innovation , 
17(1), 50-67.   
 
Azmat Ullah is with the School of Business, La Trobe University, Australia . He is expert in 
teaching applied information technology. His research interests include business-IT 
alignment, cloud computing, business process management, software engineering, 
software processes , requirements engineering, and information system development . 
 
 
 
 
Richard Lai is with the Department of Computer Science and Information Technology at 
La Trobe University, Australia. Prior to joining La Trobe, he had spent more than 10 years 
in the computer and communications industry. He was ranked as the world’s number one 
scholar in systems and software engineering consecutively for four years (19 99–2002), 
according to an annual survey published in the Journal of Systems and Software. His 
current research interests include component-based software system, software 
measurement, requirements engineering, and global software development.  
 
 
 
Journal of Software
385
Volume 13, Number 7, July 2018
