Business Model Ontology (BMO): An Examination, 
Analysis, and Evaluation
Wangchuk Chungyalpa*, Bedanta Bora*, Samarjeet Borah*
 * Department of Management Studies, Sikkim Manipal Institute of Technology(A constituent college of Sikkim Manipal 
University), Rangpo, Majitar, East Sikkim, India. Email: wgc.1976@gmail.comArticle can be accessed online at http://www.publishingindia.com
Abstract
Defining business model constitutes a major 
challenge. This is primarily because there are many 
different aspects to a business, hence when we talk of 
business models; it means different things to different 
people. Difference lies in the very concept of what 
constitutes a business (key aspects) and how such a 
concept can be represented using a common notation. 
One solution to the problem is to use ontology to 
communicate. Ontologies are agreed upon frameworks 
for representing concepts in any domain area. Hence, 
ontologies are used to represent knowledge, processes, 
business motivations, business strategies,enterprise 
structure, and more including business models. The 
Business Model Ontology (BMO) is one such ontology. 
Designed and developed by Alexander Osterwalder, it 
is aimed specifically at representing, understanding, 
communicating and analyzing business models. 
This paper is an evaluation of the Business Model 
Ontology (BMO).The paper consists of two parts. In the 
first part the researchers describe the four pillars, the 
nine elements and their sub-elements comprising the 
ontology. In the second part the ontology is reviewed 
and evaluated using nine criteria. The fundamental aim 
is to examine the ontology capabilities – its strength 
and weaknesses. 
Keyword: Ontology Definition, Business Model 
Ontology, BMO Evaluation, Ontologies, BMO AnalysisIntroduction
Defining business model constitutes a major challenge. 
This is primarily because there are different aspects to a 
business, hence when we talk of business models. It means 
different things to different people. Difference lies in the 
very concept of what constitutes a business (key aspects) 
and how such a concept can be represented using a common 
notation. One solution to the problem is to use ontology 
to communicate. Ontologies are agreed upon frameworks 
for representing concepts in any domain area. Hence, 
ontologies are used to represent knowledge, processes, 
business motivations, business strategies, enterprise 
structure and more including business models. The 
Business Model Ontology (BMO) is one such ontology. 
It is aimed specifically at representing, understanding, 
communicating, and analysing business models.
Business Model Ontology (BMO) 
Overview
The Business Model Ontology (BMO) was developed 
by Alexander Osterwalder. It is a business ontology 
developed specifically to represent business models. It 
is focused on modeling a single enterprise. The BMO 
provides one of the most comprehensive representation 
of a business. It “describes the value a company offers 
(what?) to one or several segments of customers (who?) 
and the architecture of the firm and its network of 
partners for creating, marketing and delivering this value 
Business Model Ontology (BMO): An Examination, Analysis, and Evaluation       59
and relationship capital (how?), in order to generate 
profitable and sustainable revenue streams (how much?).” 
(Osterwalder, 2004)
The BMO consists of four major pillars.
 ∑ Product
 ∑ Infrastructure Management
 ∑ Customer Interface and 
 ∑ Financial AspectsThe four pillars are made of nine building blocks. 
This is depicted in Table 1.
The nine building blocks or elements are interrelated. 
Together, they can model any business. The nine building 
blocks are further divided into sub elements. Fig.1 
depicts the four pillars, the nine building blocks, and their 
sub-elements.
Table 1:  Four Pillars and Nine Building Blocks of the Business Model Ontology
Pillar Building Block of 
Business ModelDescription
Product Value Proposition A Value Proposition is an overall view of a company’s bundle of products and ser -
vices that are of value to the customer.
Customer
InterfaceTarget Customer The Target Customer is a segment of customers a company wants to offer value to.
Distribution Channel Distribution Channel is a means of getting in touch with the customer.
Relationship The Relationship describes the kind of link a company establishes between itself and 
the customer.
Infrastructure
ManagementValue Configuration The Value Configuration describes the arrangement of activities and resources that 
are necessary to create value for the customer.
Capability A capability is the ability to execute a repeatable pattern of actions that is necessary 
in order to create value for the customer.
Partnership A Partnership is a voluntarily initiated cooperative agreement between two or more 
companies in order to create value for the customer.
Financial Aspects Cost Structure The Cost Structure is the representation in money of all the means employed in the 
business model.
Revenue Model The Revenue Model describes the way a company makes money through a variety 
of revenue flows.
Adapted from The Business Model Ontology: A proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de Lausanne, p.43
Fig.1:  The Business Model Ontology(BMO)
Adapted from The Business Model Ontology:A proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de 
Lausanne, p.44.
60      Journal of Entrepreneurship and Management  Volume 5 Issue 1 February 2016
All the nine elements and the sub elements are defined 
using the set of characteristics shown in Table 2.
Evaluation Criteria Overview
In evaluating the Business Model Ontology, the 
researchers have used nine criteria thatcover all key 
issues concerning the ontology. Some of the criteria have 
been borrowed from other sources (Gordijn, Osterwalder, 
& Pigneur, 2005), while others have been defined by the 
researchers. 
Table 3 provides a summary of criteria used in evaluating 
BMO and the questions they address. 
BMO Evaluation
Ontology Implementation Process
This criterion covers the “how” of the ontology. How 
is the ontology to be implemented? This is one area of the ontology that I feel is inadequately addressed. In 
his thesis, Alexander Osterwalder provides a detailed 
description of the various elements that comprise the 
ontology. However, he does not address the mechanisms 
for implementing the ontology. 
Business models are created and designed in two main 
contexts:
 ∑ One to create and design a completely new model. 
Here we are creating business models from scratch. 
 ∑ Second, to create models to represent existing 
businesses. 
Depending upon the context, the approach to modeling 
varies. If our aim is to create an entirely new model, the 
prescribed approach would be to start by defining the 
customer segment first. The reason being that business 
models are ultimately aimed at satisfying and exceeding 
customer needs and expectations. We design business 
models so that we can better fulfill customer needs and 
wants. In his book Business Model Generation, Alexander Table 2:  Description of a Business Model Element.
Name of BM Element Description
Definition Describes the business model element – what it is.
Part of Identifies the pillar to which a business model element belongs to. BMO consists of four pillars. Alternately, 
for sub elements it identifies the element it belongs to.
Related to Identifies other elements and sub elements it is related to.
Set of It identifies the sub elements to which an element can be decomposed into.
Cardinality “Defines the number of allowed occurrences of an element or sub-element inside the ontology .”
Attributes Each element and sub element contains unique attributes. These attributes are identified in this section. At -
tributes can be inherited from one element to another or from a sub element to its parent element. 
Attributes consists of values. These values are listed between accolades. For example, {V ALUE1, V AL -
UE2, etc}. All element and sub-element have two ‘standard attributes.’ They are NAME and DESCRIP -
TION. These attributes contain a set of characters as values indicated as such, {abc}.
Adapted from The Business Model Ontology:A proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de Lausanne, p.47
Table 3:  Nine Criteria Used in the Analysis and Evaluation of the Business Model Ontology (BMO)
S. No. Criteria Question it answers
1 Ontology implementation process Is the method for capturing and creating a business model well defined?
2 Scope What aspects of a business are modelled?
3 Purpose Why was the ontology developed?
4 Form/Representativeness: Is the method for representing concepts/elements are well-defined?
5 User friendly/communicative capability How easy is it to use?
6 Applicability/usability Can the ontology be used to model all types of businesses?
7 Granularity Till what level of detail can businesses be modelled?
8 Analytical capability How useful is the ontology in terms of business analysis?
9 Feasibility Does the ontology answer whether a business model is feasible or not?
Business Model Ontology (BMO): An Examination, Analysis, and Evaluation       61
Osterwalder defines a ‘generic process’ for designing 
and creating new and innovative business models 
(Osterwalder, & Pigneur, 2010). He defines the process 
as consisting of five phases: mobilise, understand, design, 
implement, and manage . The following are observations 
regarding Alexander’s generic process. 
First, it approaches modeling from a macro point of view. 
These are more of broad guidelines rather than detailed 
process in terms of business modeling. The process does 
not specify how one should go about implementing the 
Business Model Ontology. 
Second, the process focuses upon creating new business 
models. Indeed, he clearly states that the process is aimed 
at creating new, unexplored, and innovative business 
models. Is the same approach applicable when it comes to 
capturing and evaluating existing business models? While 
the initial phase of the generic process may apply in both 
circumstances, in the latter case, an approach needs to be 
defined. This approach is not explicated by Alexander. 
In his thesis, he defines each individual element and 
illustrates it with case studies however, he does not specify 
how one identifies individual elements. For example, 
 ∑ How do we identify core Value Propositions and es -
pecially the individual Offerings? 
 ∑ How do we identify and segment the Target 
Customers? 
 ∑ How to identify possible Channel options?
Scope
This is undoubtedly one of the strong points of Business 
Model Ontology (BMO). Since it was designed specifically 
to depict business models, it provides a holistic solution. 
Other ontologies face limitations since they have different 
aims. For example, enterprise ontology,process ontology, business motivation ontology, strategy ontology etc. 
focus primarily on one particular aspect of business be 
it the organisational structure, business process, business 
strategy etc. whereas the BMO covers all key aspects 
concerning a business. However, what exactly constitutes 
key aspects of a business is open for debate. Indeed, 
the argument goes back to the very definition of what 
constitutes a business model. Alexander Osterwalder 
understandably has used this specific criteria “definition 
of business model” while comparing ontologies (Gordijn  
et al. , 2005). As pointed out by many authors there is 
no consensus on what constitutes a business model 
(Chesbrough, 2010; Timmers, 1998; Magretta, 2002).In 
our view, the Business Model Ontology (BMO) does an 
excellent portrayal of a business. Based on Balance Score 
Card concept, it addresses all the basic building blocks of 
an organisation (Osterwalder, 2004). Table 4 provides a 
quick comparison between BSC and BMO.
Purpose
Purpose answers the question Why? Why was the ontology 
designed in the first place? Alexander Osterwalder 
identifies the following generic purposes behind the 
development of various types of ontologies (Osterwalder, 
2004):
 ∑ improved communication
 ∑ interoperability
 ∑ system engineering aspects such as reusability, 
searching, reliability, specification
 ∑ knowledge representation and acquisition
To us, the question is not so much why the ontology is 
created as why people engage in business modeling since 
ontology is merely anagreed framework to capture and 
represent concepts relating to business modeling. Table5 
Table 4:  BSC and BMO Comparison.
BSC BMO
Finance Financial pillar consisting of cost structure, revenue stream, and profit. 
Process Management infrastructure pillar consisting of – specifically value configuration element and its sub 
element activities. 
Customer Customer interface pillar composed of relationship element, target customer element, and channel ele -
ment. 
Innovation &Learning Product interface.  
Adapted from the Business Model Ontology: A proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de Lausanne. Pg. 43
62      Journal of Entrepreneurship and Management  Volume 5 Issue 1 February 2016
lists five common reasons behind business modeling 
and compares how BMO performs in achieving these 
purposes. 
Form/Representativeness
The researchers define form or representativeness using 
two criteria: 
 1. How well does the ontology represent and articulate 
the concepts and relationships of the specific do -
main it is representing?
 2. To what level of formality is this representation 
defined?The Business Model Ontology (BMO) is one of the most 
comprehensive ontologies when it comes to business 
modeling. It is an excellent tool that clearly captures and 
articulates the concepts and relationships that define a 
business. 
In terms of level of representation, the BMO again 
performs excellently. Ontologies can be represented at 
many different levels of formality.
 ∑ Highly informal - Ontologies are represented 
in natural language. It is easy to represent and 
communicate. 
 ∑ Semi-informal - Ontologies are represented in natu -
ral language. However, in this case the natural lan -
guage has a more rigid structure. 
Table 5:  Reasons Behind Business Modeling
Purpose BMO
Promote communication & under -
standing through representationThis is one of BMO’s strongest suite. It is able to capture the key aspects of a business. It 
has well defined structure and framework in terms of concepts, relationships that allows 
depiction of models at many different levels. 
Systems engineering The BMO is supported by Business Model Modeling Language (BM2L). BM2L is a 
formal and structured method for codifying the Business Model Ontology developed 
by Alexander Osterwalder. It uses eXtensible Markup Language XML structure. Be -
cause BM2L is based on XML, a widely supported technology, it offers the following 
advantages. First, it is an open standard and hence platform independent. Second, it is a 
technology that is widely being adopted and used by application vendors and software 
developers (Osterwalder, 2004).
Alignment Aligning vision, strategies, goals, objectives, priorities, values etc. across an enterprise 
poses a major challenge for businesses. Techniques and methods such as the Balance 
Score Card (BSC) (Kaplan& Norton,1992), Management By Objectives (MBO)and IT 
Score Cardare few of the approaches aimed at achieving alignment within an organisa -
tion. Likewise,Business Models is a tool that can be used to achieve alignment across 
enterprise/s. The BMO in particular allows businesses to achieve alignment in the areas 
of business infrastructure, business value proposition, target customers and business part -
ners. 
Business analysis Although Alexander does not specify how the Business Model Ontology can be used in 
conducting business analysis, overall BMO is an excellent tool for performing business 
analysis. The BMO is an ontology that consists of all the key elements comprising a 
business. The characteristics of each of the element and its sub elements are well defined, 
including the relationship between the elements. Its ease of use and application allow us 
to quickly capture, analyse, and interpret various business models. 
Interoperability There are two ways of understanding interoperability (1) interoperability of IT systems 
and applications (2) Interoperability of business functions, processes, structures resulting 
from mergers and acquisitions. In both cases, BMO performs excellently. In the first case 
as highlighted earlier, the BMO is supported by Business Model Modeling Language 
(BM2L). The BM2L being an open standard facilitates communication and integration 
between various applications and platforms. In the latter case, BMO can promote clear 
understanding, communication, and exchange of ideas between stakeholders facilitating 
interoperability, and integrative efforts. 
Business Model Ontology (BMO): An Examination, Analysis, and Evaluation       63
 ∑ Semi-formal - Ontologies are expressed in a for -
mally defined language. Some of the popular de -
fined languages used to design ontologies include 
the UML, Petrinet, BPMN etc. 
 ∑ Formal – Ontologies are expressed in a high -
ly rigid and structured method. For exam -
ple B2ML, Ontolingua, OWL Web Ontology 
Language(Ontology Made Easy, 2013).
BMO enables representation at multiple levels - Semi-
Formal and Formal levels. Fig.2 is an example of BMO at 
a Semi-Formal level. 
Fig.3 shows translation of Business Model into a highly 
formal level using B2ML. 
User Friendly/Communicative Capability
All ontologies share one common trait – to facilitate 
and improve communication. Hence, ontologies should 
be user friendly. The researchers have defined user 
friendliness using the traits listed in Table 6. Applicability/Usability
In evaluating theapplicability and usability of Business 
Model Ontology, the researchers are predominantly 
considering the type of businesses that can be modeled 
using the BMO. Businesses can be classified largely as 
manufacturing organisation, service provider organisation, 
governments, non-governmental organisations, 
international organisations, armed forces, charities, 
not-for-profit corporations, partnerships, cooperatives, 
universities, and various other types of political 
organisations (Wikipedia, 2015). BMO is designed to be 
used by any type of organisation, be it manufacturing firm 
or service provider. In his thesis, Alexander Osterwalder 
categorises businesses into three broad categories:
	∑ Manufacturing firms
	∑ Service firms and 
	∑ Brokerage firms 
The BMO accommodates all the above three types by 
specifying different type of value configuration for each 
type of firm. This is illustrated in Table 6. 
Fig.2:   Color Plaza Value Configuration,  Activities and Resources
Adapted from The Business Model Ontology: A proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de 
Lausanne, p.88.
64      Journal of Entrepreneurship and Management  Volume 5 Issue 1 February 2016
Fig. 3:  Excerpt of the Product Part of the BM2L Document of the MJF
Excerpt of the product part of the BM2L document of the MJF . Adapted from The Business Model Ontology:A proposition in a design 
science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de Lausanne, p.122.
Table 6:  Traits for Assessing the User Friendliness of the Ontology
Traits Business Model Ontology (BMO)
Ease of representing concepts 
& defining relationshipsThe BMO in its semi-formal form is entirely understandable. It uses natural language to rep -
resent and depict concepts and define relationships. Simple templates in the form of tables and 
geometric shapes (ovals, rectangles, arrows etc.) allow users to focus on the concepts rather than 
the ontology syntax. 
Software & technical skills re -
quirementsSome ontologies require software and fairly good technical skills to be able to use it. For ex -
ample, the e3 ontology is best used with the help of a software (Johannesson, 2006). The Busi -
ness Model Ontology does not require specialised software ortechnical skills to be able to use it. 
The BMO in its semi-formal form can be used by business men and entrepreneurs without the 
aid of software. 
Learning curve The learning curve for BMO is fairly short. Business people can quickly familiarise themselves 
with the basic concepts and start utilizing BMO within two to three weeks. A much more sim -
plified version of the original BMO is the Business Model Canvas (BMC). The BMC is a tool 
used to quickly grasp, portray, analyze, and evaluate business models. (Osterwalder, & Pigneur, 
2010). 
Business Model Ontology (BMO): An Examination, Analysis, and Evaluation       65
Adapted from The Business Model Ontology:A 
proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, 
A. (2004), Université de Lausanne, p.85.
Issues arise when we consider other alternate types of 
organisations such as non-profit organisation. Although 
efforts are underway to transform non-profit organisations 
to become more ‘business like’ (Dart, 2004), non-profit 
organisations comprise of unique sets of activities quite different from those of for profit organisations. 
Key activities for non-profit organisations include the 
following:
	∑ Fund raising and grant writing
	∑ Governance 
	∑ Nonprofit Budgeting and AccountingTraits Business Model Ontology (BMO)
Traceability Traceability refers to “the ability to describe and follow the life of a requirement, in both for -
wards and backwards direction (i.e. from its origins, through its development and specification, 
to its subsequent deployment and use, and through all periods of on-going refinement and itera -
tion in any of these phases)” (Céspedes, Filho, Gómez, & Mendoza, 2012). In process models 
traceability is a key capability that must be built into the model. A model must be capable of 
tracing processes and artifacts to their source (Holt, 2009).
The BMO includes traceability capability.However, it is an area that could perhaps be developed 
further. In case of Business Modeling we are concerned with tracing the following concepts and 
relationships within the model.
∑ Customer Requirements
∑ Business Requirements and 
∑ Relationships / Linkages between:
∑ Elements and their sub elements
∑ Attributes across elements
While the BMO does include mechanisms to trace the latter group (relationships and linkages), 
it does not address mechanism to trace customer requirements through the model nor does it 
explicate how business requirements are translated into a business model. 
Flexibility Here flexibility refers to the ability to modify, change, perhaps even further develop the follow -
ing capabilities: 
∑ Concept representation
∑ Relationship definition
∑ Approach to modeling
∑ Attribute modification
The BMO in its semi-formal form can easily be modified to incorporate new sets of information 
specifically in the form of attributes. New relationships can be defined between elements and 
between their sub elements. Alexander Osterwalder does not specify rules and heuristics to be 
followed strictly. Indeed, it could be the reason why he has not specified BMO implementation 
method in detail in order to maintain the flexibility. Hence, how we implementBMO is largely 
left up to the modeler. 
Table 6:   Business  Type, Their Value Configuration, and  Their Primary  Activities
Business type Value Configuration Type (BMO) Primary activities (BMO)
Manufacturing firms Value Chain Inbound Logistics, Operations, Outbound Logistics, Marketing and 
Sales, Service. 
Service providers Value Shop Problem Finding and Acquisition, Problem Solving, Choice, Ex -
ecution, Control and Evaluation. 
Brokerage firms Value Network Network Promotion and Contract Management, Service Provision -
ing, Network Infrastructure Operations. 
Adapted from The Business Model Ontology:A proposition in a design science approach by Osterwalder, A. (2004), Université de Lausanne, p.85.
66      Journal of Entrepreneurship and Management  Volume 5 Issue 1 February 2016
	∑ Programme Development and Evaluation
	∑ Public Policy
	∑ V olunteer Programmes
Likewise the revenue models for non-profit organisations 
will be quite different from that of for profit organisations.  
Granularity
Much like process modeling, business modeling can 
be performed at various levels of abstraction. It can be 
constructed at a very abstract level or at a very detailed 
level. The modeling standard used must have the 
capability of depicting models at both these levels. The 
Business Model Ontology (BMO) as defined by Alexander 
Osterwalder in his thesis has just such capability. The 
BMO consists of nine elements which are part of four 
major pillars. Each of these elements can be decomposed 
to its more fundamental sub elements. For instance, the 
element Value Proposition can be decomposed into its sub 
element Offering. The sub-elements enable the depiction 
and examination of parent element concept in much 
more detail. For example, a bank offers its customers 
online banking facility. The online banking facility may 
be considered as a single Value Proposition composed 
of many individual Offerings such as, bill payments, 
money transfers, customer grievance handling. Hence, 
the individual Offering element permits the depiction of 
Value Proposition element at a more granular level. This 
is absolutely vital to comprehend business models fully. 
Analytical Capability 
One central role of a business model is its use as an 
analytical tool. In this regard it plays the role of a strategic 
tool and a decision making tool. Business models can be 
used to perform analysis and evaluation of various types 
of business models that a firm can adopt. It can help firm’s 
evaluate the following aspects of any potential model: 
	∑ Profitability and revenue generation
	∑ Overall cost
	∑ Key capability requirements to sustain a model
	∑ Customer behaviour analysis (relationship)
	∑ Value proposition and individual offering analysis
	∑ Channel suitability and cost	∑ Partnership analysis
	∑ Value configuration, activity, and resource require -
ment analysis and more
Essentially, we are talking of “What If?” analysis capability.
By working with many different scenarios, businesses 
can evaluate the “sensitivity of e-business models with 
respect to financial parameters, future trends, and other 
parameters such as customer behaviour.”(Gordijn, & 
Akkermans, 2001). In his thesis, Alexander Osterwalder 
does not elaborate on the analytical capabilities of the 
BMO. His case studies primarily concerns capture, 
representation and depiction of business models. Of 
course while such representation provides for excellent 
analysis of the existing business models, he does not 
explicate exactly how BMO can be used to carry out 
what if analysis by considering alternatives, scenarios, 
and interpreting the findings. The BMO consists of all 
the key elements to perform such analysis. In our view, 
limitations of BMO exist in the attributes defining the 
Parent and Child element. However, this is a topic best 
covered in separate paper. 
Feasibility 
Is a particular business model feasible? How do we evaluate 
feasibility? Of course the defining criterionis financial 
success defined in terms of profitability. Goderjinn and 
Akkermans (2001) define a feasible business model as 
one where all the concerned stakeholders profit from 
the model or in some way increase their “economic 
utility.”(Gordijn & Akkermans, 2001).One of the defining 
criteria of a successful business model is that it must be 
implementable. Theoretical possibilities alone do not 
yield tangible benefits to the business. Whether a business 
model isimplementable is a function of many things 
namely: resource requirement, capability requirement, 
processes (activities) requirement to sustain and support a 
model, partner relationship requirement, target customer 
compatibility, value propositionevaluation and more. 
Such analytical capability should be built into any 
ontology. While the Business Model Ontology (BMO) 
consists of elements and attributes that allow for clear 
feasibility analysis, nonetheless there are certain aspects 
of the BMO can be enhanced to smooth out the analytical 
process. 
Business Model Ontology (BMO): An Examination, Analysis, and Evaluation       67
Conclusion
The BMO, including BMC, is an excellent ontology 
that clearly meets its purpose and objectives. Since its 
inception in 2004, the Business Model Ontology (BMO), 
particularly the Business Model Canvas (BMC) has 
quickly gained popularity and world wide acceptance 
across the globe. Today, the BMC is being used to 
evaluate/examine existing business models and innovate 
and try out new models by companies such as Microsoft, 
MasterCard, Adobe, 3M, SAP, Ernst & Young, Xerox, 
Capgemini, Ericsson, Oracle, Deloitte, Intel, Fujitsu and 
more. It is a testament of the capabilities, versatility, 
maturity, of the Business Model Ontology (BMO) and 
the Business Model Canvas (BMC). Nonetheless, in our 
opinion there do exist certain gaps in the BMO, especially 
in areas such as, implementation process, traceability of 
customer and business requirements, certain forms of 
business model analysis, and applicability and usability 
of the ontology. These are potential areas for further 
study. However, it should be mentioned that the discipline 
of business modeling is very open and unstructured. 
Ontological approach to business modeling provides a 
common framework for representing business concepts 
and relationships and hence is an attempt to give 
business modeling form and structure. Thus, the authors 
might have intentionally refrained from addressing the 
above areas so as to provide the flexibility to modelers 
themselves much like the UML standard that provides the 
requisite framework for modeling systems but does not 
specify in detail the implementation process, traceability 
capabilities, and analytical capabilities.
References
Chesbrough, H. (2010). Business Model Innovation: 
Opportunities and Barriers.  Long Range Planning, 
10.Dart, R. (2004). Being “business-like” in a nonprofit 
organization: A grounded and inductive typology. 
Nonprofit and voluntary sector quarterly , 33(2), 
290-310.
Gordijn, J., & Akkermans, H. (2001). Designing and eval -
uating e-business models. Intelligent E_Business.
Gordijn, J., Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y . (2005). 
Comparing two business model ontologies for de -
signing e-business models and value constella -
tions. Paper presented at the 18th Bled e Conference 
Integration in Action, Slovenia. 
Holt, J. (2009). A pragmatic guide to Business Process 
modelling  (2nd ed.). Viva Books Pvt. Ltd.New Delhi
Johannesson, P. (2006). Introduction to e3-value. 
Retrieved from http://www.interop-noe.org
Magretta, J. (2002, May). Why business models matter? 
Harvard Business Review,  8.
Mendoza, O.. (2012). Towards a framework for im -
proving requirement traceability. Ingeniería 
e Investigación , 32(1), 48-52. Retrieved from 
http://www.scielo.org.co/scielo.php?script=sci_
arttext&pid=S0120-56092012000100009&lng=en&
tlng=en.
Ontology Made Easy. (2013). Ontology made easy . 
Retrieved from ww.ontology.com.
Osterwalder, A. (2004). The business model ontology: A 
proposition in a design science approach. Université 
de Lausanne.
Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y . (2010). Business mod -
el generation.A handbook for visionaries. Game 
Changers, and Challengers.  New Delhi, India: 
Wiley India Pvt. Ltd. 
Timmers, P. (1998). Business model for electronic mar -
kets. Focus Theme , 8(2), 6.
Céspedes , M. A. T., Filho, G. C., Gómez, Y ., & Mendoza, 
O. R. (2012). Towards a framework for improving 
requirement traceability. Ingeniería e Investigación , 
32(1).
Wikipedia (2015). Organization. Retrieved from http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Organization
