Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  1 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci 
Volume15, Article     
May 2005 
 
 
 
 
CLARIFYING BUSINESS MODELS: ORIGINS, 
PRESENT, AND FUTURE OF THE CONCEPT 
 
Alexander Osterwalder 
University of Lausanne & BusinessModelDesign.com  
alex@businessmodeldesign.com   
 
Yves Pigneur 
University of Lausanne  
yves.pigneur@unil.ch   
 
Christopher L. Tucci 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  
christopher.tucci@epfl.ch  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
TUTORIAL 
 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  2 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci  
 
CLARIFYING BUSINESS MODELS: ORIGINS, 
PRESENT, AND FUTURE OF THE CONCEPT 
 
 
Alexander Osterwalder 
University of Lausanne & BusinessModelDesign.com  
alex@businessmodeldesign.com   
 
Yves Pigneur 
University of Lausanne  
yves.pigneur@unil.ch   
 
Christopher L. Tucci 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology  
christopher.tucci@epfl.ch  
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper aims to clarifyi the concept of business  models, its usages, and its 
roles in the Information Systems domain. A review o f the literature shows a broad 
diversity of understandings, usages, and places in the firm. The paper identifies 
the terminology or ontology used to describe a busi ness model, and compares 
this terminology with previous work. Then the gener al usages, roles and potential 
of the concept are outlined. Finally, the connectio n between the business model 
concept and Information Systems is described in the  form of eight propositions to 
be analyzed in future work. 
Keywords : business models, business model concept 
 I. INTRODUCTION 
Following an article in CAIS discussing the relatio nship between strategy and 
business models [Seddon, Lewis et al. 2004] we beli eve that some clarifications 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  3 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci need to be discussed in the domain of business mode ls. Admittedly, the topic of 
business models led to a lot of publications by jou rnalists, business people, 
consultants and academics. It is discussed in vario us different domains, such as 
e-business, information systems, strategy, and mana gement [Pateli and Giaglis 
2003]. Yet, despite all the ink spilt and words spo ken, business models are still 
relatively poorly understood [Linder and Cantrell 2 000], particularly as a research 
area. For example, a survey we conducted with membe rs of the IS community on 
the ISWORLD mailing list shows that there is a dive rgence of understanding 
among people and particularly between business-orie nted and technology 
oriented ones. We asked the participants for their definitions of what they 
understand to be a business model (Table 1). From 6 2 respondents we received  
54 definitions. For 44 definitions we could disting uish between a more 
value/customer-oriented approach (55%), similar to the understanding of a 
business model outlined in this paper and a more ac tivity/role-related approach, 
which we understand as the more established field o f enterprise models (45%). 
From a company perspective, the former approach is more outward looking, 
while the latter is more inward looking.  
These results show that a discussion of the meaning , but also usage of the 
business model concept, particularly among and betw een the business and IS 
domain is timely.  
Table 1. Business Model Survey 
 Number of 
business-
oriented 
respondents Number of  
technology-
oriented 
respondents Number of all 
respondents 
value/customer-oriented business model definition 1 7 7 24 
activity/role-oriented business model definition (E M) 8 12 20 
number of respondents 25 19 44 
 
The literature shows that the topic of business mod els is often discussed 
superficially and frequently without any understand ing of its roots, its role, and its 
potential. Thus, this paper aims to shed some light  on the origins, the present, 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  4 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci and the future of the business model concept, parti cularly in the Information 
Systems  domain. To  do so, we first discuss the co ncept by itself and then, trace 
the possible areas of contribution, notably in IS, of this relatively young research 
topic.  
In this paper we describe the business model's plac e in the firm as the blueprint 
of how a company does business. It is the translati on of strategic issues, such as 
strategic positioning and strategic goals into a co nceptual model that explicitly 
states how the business functions. The business mod el serves as a building plan 
that allows designing and realizing the business st ructure and systems that 
constitute the company’s operational and physical f orm. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II w e discuss when, how, and why 
the term "business model" became prominent. We desc ribe its origins, its 
different understandings, its evolution and its pla ce in the firm. In Section III we 
show which domains and concepts are addressed in th e business model 
concept. We discuss the use of the business model c oncept and portray different 
potential application areas in Section IV. In Secti on V, we argue that the concept 
can contribute particularly to the IS domain and we  draw a number of 
propositions for further research. Finally, in Sect ion VI, we conclude and sketch 
out the different trajectories of business model re search in the IS domain.  
II. BUSINESS MODELS AS CONCEPT 
Before digging into the definitions, origins, and u sages of the expression 
business model we reflect on its semantics. Both bu siness and model, by 
themselves have a specific meaning. In combination that meaning mirrors many 
of the possible applications of the business model concept described later in this 
paper. Based on WordNet 2.0, we interpret the world  model as  
"a simplified description and representation of a co mplex entity or 
process ".  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  5 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Representation implies conceptualization, which can  be described as “the 
objects, concepts and other entities that are assum ed to exist in some area of 
interest and their inter-relationship [Genesereth a nd Nilsson 1987]. Also based 
on WordNet 2.0, we interpret the word business as  
"the activity of providing goods and services involv ing financial, 
commercial and industrial aspects ".  
Putting these elements together we propose that the  reflection on the business 
model concept must go in the following direction:  
A business model is a conceptual tool containing a set of objects, 
concepts and their relationships with the objective  to express the 
business logic of a specific firm. Therefore we mus t consider which 
concepts and relationships allow a simplified descr iption and 
representation of what value is provided to custome rs, how this is 
done and with which financial consequences.  
This definition is sufficiently broad to embrace th e different reflections on 
business models that sprung up in different fields such as e-business, IS, 
computer science, strategy or management [Pateli an d Giaglis 2003].  
A review of the literature using the term business model shows that s a 
continuum between authors using the term to simply refer to the way a company 
does business [e.g. Galper 2001; Gebauer and Ginsbu rg 2003] and authors that 
emphasize the model aspect [e.g. Gordijn 2002; Oste rwalder 2004]. These two 
viewpoints differ because the former generically re fers to the way a company 
does business, whereas the latter refers to a conce ptualization of the way a 
company does business in order to reduce complexity  to an understandable 
level. Proponents of the latter viewpoint propose m eta-models that consist of 
elements and relationships that reflect the complex  entities that they aim to 
describe. In other words, for business models, the quest is to identify the 
elements and relationships that describe the busine ss a company does. Thus, 
the business model concept can best be understood a s a conceptual view of a 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  6 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci particular aspect of a specific company. The meta-m odel then defines the words 
and sentences that we use to describe this view.  
ORIGINS 
To detect the origins and particularly the surge of  the business model discussion 
we applied a method successfully used by Abrahamson  [Abrahamson and 
Fairchild 1999] to study management discourse. It c onsist of tracing the 
appearance of a specific management term in a large  number of journals to study 
its evolution. We electronically searched the title s, abstracts, keywords, and full 
texts of all articles in the Business Source Premie r database of scholarly 
business journals for the word string "business mod el" [cf. Stähler 2001]. The 
search included several variations of the original term like "e-business model", 
"new business model" or "Internet business model". The results are shown in 
Table 2. 
Table 2. Occurrences of the Term "Business Model" i n Scholarly Reviewed 
Journals 
Year in title in abstract in keywords in full text 
2003 30 159 10 667 
2002 22 109 2 617 
2001 11 100 7 609 
2000 16 67 1 491 
1999 3 42 1 262 
1998 1 19 0 128 
1997 1 14 0 66 
1996 0 14 0 57 
1995 0 4 0 36 
1994 0 2 0 18 
1993 0 5 0 18 
1992 0 2 0 15 
1991 0 1 0 10 
1990 0 4 0 7 
 
Surprisingly, the query shows that the popularity o f the term "business model" is 
a relatively young phenomenon. Though it appeared f or the first time in an 
academic article in 1957 [Bellman, Clark et al. 195 7] and in the title and abstract 
of a paper in 1960 [Jones 1960] it rose to prominen ce only towards the end of the 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  7 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci 1990s. This surge coincidences with the advent of t he Internet in the business 
world and the steep rise of the NASDAQ stock market  for technology-heavy 
companies(Figure 1). The term was most frequently b ut not only used in 
relationship with the Internet from the 1990s onwar ds. Oddly, the number of 
times the term "business model" appeared in a busin ess journal (peer-reviewed 
and non-peer reviewed) follows a pattern that resem bles the shape of the 
NASDAQ market index. It is not quite clear what to conclude from this 
observation besides the fact that the topic of busi ness models probably has a 
relationship with technology.  
  
Figure 1. Occurrences of the Term "Business Model" Compared to NASDAQ 
Fluctuations 
 
Part of the relationship between technology and bus iness models stems from the 
business model concept’s roots in transaction cost economics (TCE). The sharp 
rise in cheap information technology, bandwidth, an d communication possibilities 
made it much easier for companies to work in so-cal led value webs because 
coordination and transaction costs fell substantial ly [Tapscott, Ticoll et al. 2000; 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  8 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Amit and Zott 2001]. Companies, in some cases even competitors, jointly offer 
and commercialize value to their customers. That is , the business design choices 
for managers increased substantially based on cheap  and available information 
technology. This cost decrese led to industry bound aries becoming increasingly 
blurred. The business model concept is a candidate to replace the industry as a 
unit of analysis.  
Consider iTunes Software/Website of Apple Computer a successful music 
downloading service. The main role of this service is not only to sell music, but to 
enhance the company's sales of iPods, a portable di gital music player. Thus, in 
terms of industry sectors,  this website includes t he software, online, hardware, 
and music industriesIn terms of business models thi s website forms a whole set 
of business design choices that reinforce one anoth er.  
DEFINITIONS, META-MODELS, TAXONOMIES OF TYPES AND I NSTANCES 
A lot of the fuzziness and confusion about business  models stems from the fact 
that when different authors write about business mo dels they do not necessarily 
mean the same thing [Linder and Cantrell 2000]. In the literature, the expression 
stands for various things, such as parts of a busin ess model (e.g. auction model), 
types of business models (e.g. direct-to-customer m odel), concrete real world 
instances of business models (e.g. the Dell model) or concepts (elements and 
relationships of a model). In this section we try t o bring some clarity to the 
business model domain by showing what the different  authors address when 
they talk about business models. 
We believe that the authors writing about business models can be classified in 
three different categories that can (but do not nec essarily have to be) 
hierarchically linked to one another.  
1. Authors that describe the business model concept  as an abstract 
overarching concept that can describe all real worl d businesses.  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  9 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci 2. Authors that describe a number of different abst ract types of business 
models (i.e. a classification scheme), each one des cribing a set of 
businesses with common characteristics.  
3. Authors presenting aspects of or a conceptualiza tion of a particular real 
world business model.  
All three categories can vary in their modelling ri gour, ranging from simple 
definitions, over the listing of elements to a set of related, defined and 
conceptualized elements.  
We do not advocate any one of these three categorie s because they are not 
mutually exclusive and they all make sense. However , we strongly believe that 
they must be distinguished conceptually in order to  achieve a common 
understanding of business models. Furthermore, we t hink that the three levels 
make the most sense when they are hierarchically li nked to each other through a 
comprehensive approach (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Business Model Concept Hierarchy Business Model 
Concept 
Business Model 
Type 
Amazon  Dell Business Model 
Type 
Business Model 
of Dell Business Model 
of Amazon Business Model 
eBay 
eBay 
conceptual levels instance levels DEFINITION 
what is a business model?  
META -MODEL  
what elements belon g into a business model? 
TAXONOMY OF TYPES  
which business models resemble each other?  
SUB -(META) -MODELS  
what are the common characteristics?  
INSTANCES (VIEW OF COMPANY)  
MODELLED INSTANCE  
REAL WOLRD COMPANY  1 
2 
3 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  10 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Level 1: Overarching Business Model Concept 
This first level consists of definitions of what a business model is and what 
belongs in them and meta-models that conceptualize them. On this level the 
business model is seen as an abstract concept that allows describing what a 
business does for a living. The definitions [Timmer s 1998; Magretta 2002] simply 
give an idea of what a business model is whereas th e meta-models [Chesbrough 
and Rosenbloom 2000; Hamel 2000; Linder and Cantrel l 2000; Mahadevan 
2000; Amit and Zott 2001; Applegate 2001; Petrovic,  Kittl et al. 2001; Weill and 
Vitale 2001; Gordijn 2002; Stähler 2002; Afuah and Tucci 2003; Osterwalder 
2004] in addition define what elements are to be fo und in a business model. 
Some authors such as Hamel [2000]substantiate the c onceptual aspect, while 
others adopt a rigorous modelling approach (Gordijn , [2002] and Osterwalder 
[2004]). 
Level 2: Taxonomies 
This level consists of several types or meta-model types of business models that 
are generic but contain common characteristics [Bam bury 1998; Timmers 1998; 
Rappa 2001; Weill and Vitale 2001]. Types refer to a simple categorization, while 
meta-model types refer to different models. As expl ained above this distinction 
reflects different degrees of conceptualization. Fu rthermore, the types and 
models can, but are not necessarily a sub-class of an overarching business 
model concept [Weill and Vitale 2001]. Also, the bu siness model taxonomies do 
not necessarily apply to businesses in general but to specific industries, such as 
to WLAN [Shubar and Lechner 2004], computing [Rappa  2004], Mobile-Games 
[MacInnes, Moneta et al. 2002] or even trafficking in women [Shelley 2003]. 
Level 3: Instance Level 
This level consist of either concrete real world bu siness models or of 
conceptualization, representations, and description s of real world business 
models. Several authors used the business model per spective to analyze 
companies, such as Xerox [Chesbrough and Rosenbloom  2002], Dell [Kraemer, 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  11 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Dedrick et al. 2000] General Motors' OnStar project  [Barabba, Huber et al. 2002], 
specific online supermarkets [Yousept and Li 2004]  and online media companies 
[Krueger, van der Beek et al. 2004]. Yet, these aut hors vary greatly in terms of 
conceptualization in how they represent these real world business models. 
EVOLUTION OF THE BUSINESS MODEL CONCEPT 
Over the years,  research in business models mature d. Although researchers do 
not yet rely on each others work and findings exten sively, a certain progression 
can be observed. Based on an extensive literature r eview we propose five 
phases in the evolution of business model literatur e. These phases are shown in 
Figure 3. We account only for literature that focus es on the business model 
concept and not om literature merely mentioning bus iness models. 
 
Figure 3. Evolution of the Business Model Concept 
During the first phase, when the term business mode l started to become 
prominent, a number of authors suggested business m odel definitions and 
classifications [Timmers 1998; Rappa 2001].  
In the second phase, authors started to complete th e definitions by proposing 
what elements belong into a business models. At fir st, these propositions were 
simple "shopping lists", just mentioning the compon ents of a business model 
[Chesbrough and Rosenbloom 2000; Linder and Cantrel l 2000; Petrovic, Kittl et 
al. 2001; Magretta 2002].  define & classify 
business models  list business  
model 
components describe business 
model elements model business  
model elements  apply business 
model concept  
Rappa [2001] 
Timmers [1998] Linder & Cantrell [2000] 
Magretta [2002] 
Amit & Zott [2001] Afuah & Tucci [2001; 
2003] 
Hamel [2000] 
Weill & Vitale [2001] Gordijn [2002] 
Osterwalder & Pigneur 
[2002] definitions & 
taxonomies "shopping list" 
of components components as 
building blocks reference models 
& ontologies applications & 
conceptual tools authors  outcome  activity  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  12 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Only in the third phase did detailed descriptions o f these components become 
available [Hamel 2000; Weill and Vitale 2001; Afuah  and Tucci 2003].  
In a fourth phase researchers started to model the components conceptually. 
This work led to the proposition of business model meta-models in the form of 
reference models and ontologies [Gordijn 2002; Oste rwalder 2004]. In this phase 
models also started to be evaluated or tested more rigorously.  
Finally, in the ongoing fifth phase, the reference models are being applied in 
management and IS applications. 
THE PLACE OF THE BUSINESS MODEL CONCEPT IN THE FIRM  
Because the business model concept is relatively yo ung, its place and role in the 
firm is still subject to debate. Some of the issues  discussed are the distinction 
between business model and business process model [ Gordijn, Akkermans et al. 
2000], the difference between strategy and business  models [Linder and Cantrell 
2000; Porter 2001; Stähler 2002; Seddon, Lewis et a l. 2004] or the distinction 
between enterprise models and business models. 
The Distinction Between Business Models and Busines s Process Models 
Business models and business process models should clearly be distinguished 
[Gordijn, Akkermans et al. 2000]. A review of the b usiness model literature shows 
that the business model concept is generally unders tood as a view of the firm's 
logic for creating and commercializing value, while  the business process model is 
more about how a business case is implemented in pr ocesses). Part of the 
confusion comes from the expression "business model ing" being used mainly for 
the activity of business process modeling, which is  the activity of modeling 
processes [Aguilar-Savén 2004] and not business mod els. Furthermore, in the 
domain of business process models, a multitude of t ools and concepts already 
exist, such as UML activity diagrams or Petri nets.  In contrast, the concepts and 
tools that help companies and their managers specif y their more conceptual 
business model are less developed. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  13 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Strategy and Business Models 
As to the debate about the difference between strat egy and business models the 
picture is much less clear and the authors debating  the subject differ widely in 
their opinion. Some people use the terms "strategy"  and "business model" 
interchangeably [Magretta 2002]. Often they use it to refer to everything they 
believe gives them a competitive advantage [Stähler  2002]. Yet, a review of the 
literature shows that the view that business models  and strategy are linked but 
distinct is more common [Magretta 2002; Mansfield a nd Fourie 2004]. A practical 
distinction describes business models as a system t hat shows how the pieces of 
a business fit together, while strategy also includ es competition [Magretta 2002]. 
In contrast, others understand the business model a s an abstraction of a firm's 
strategy that may potentially apply to many firms [ Seddon, Lewis et al. 2004]. In 
general however, business model literature seems to  fit the former definition 
better, because most of it focuses on describing th e elements and relationships 
that outline how a company creates and markets valu e.  
Business Model Execution and Implementation 
Another difference between strategy and business mo dels that has been less 
discussed to date is that strategy includes executi on and implementation, while 
the business model is more about how a business wor ks as a system. Business 
model implementation or execution is a widely negle cted issue. Wrongly, in our 
opinion, because it is important conceptually to di stinguish model (i.e. the 
business concept) and implementation (i.e. the form  it takes in reality). Many 
authors write about successful business models. But  a business model cannot be 
successful per se. We believe that a business model  can be more or less sound 
and coherent but then it still must be implemented.  A “strong” business model 
can be managed badly and fail, just as much as a “w eak” business model may 
succeed because of strong management and implementa tion skills. However, 
research on what exactly is a "good" or "weak" busi ness model is still in its 
infancy.  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  14 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Business model implementation and management includ e the "translation" of the 
business model as a plan into more concrete element s, such as a business 
structure (e.g. departments, units, human resources ), business processes (e.g. 
workflows (responsibilities) and infrastructure and  systems (e.g. buildings, ICT) 
[Brews and Tucci 2003]). Furthermore, the implement ation of the business model 
must be financed through internal or external fundi ng 9e.g. venture capital, cash 
flow) as illustrated in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. Implementing Business Models 
The Business Triangle  
As explained in the introduction we understand the business model as a building 
plan that allows designing and realizing the busine ss structure and systems that 
constitute the operational and physical form the co mpany will take. We call this 
relation between strategy, organization, and system s the business triangle that is 
constantly subject to external pressures, like comp etitive forces, social change, 
technological change, customer opinion and legal en vironment (Figure 5). Design  
Business Model Implement 
Business Model Finance 
Business Model 
Management defines and 
designs a business 
concept that responds to 
market circumstances Management works out a 
financial structure for the 
business model (e.g. internal 
funding, venture capital, stock  
market funding)  The business model is 
implemented into 
business structure, 
business processes and  
infrastructure  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  15 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci  
Figure 5. The Business Model's Place in the Firm 
Enterprise Models and Business Models 
Enterprise models and business models differ even t hough they are conceptually 
relatively close. The term enterprise modelling is a collective name for the use of 
models in enterprise engineering and enterprise ope ration [Bernus 2001]. Thus, 
enterprise models are mainly concerned with process es and activities 
[Wortmann, Hegge et al. 2001], while business model s essentially focus on value 
creation and customers. In Figure 5 enterprise mode ls would be found in the 
business organization box together with similar mod elling activities, such as 
business process modelling. Its main role inside a firm is to improve efficiency 
[Doumeingts and Ducq 2001]. In contrast, the main r ole of the business model is 
to find and design a promising business concept.  
Effect of Time 
Tthe relationship between business models and time is little discussed. The 
expression “a company’s business model” refers to t he way a firm does 
business. As such, it is a snapshot and description  at a specific moment in time. 
But business models change rapidly [Hamel 2000; Lin der and Cantrell 2000], 
which creates the need  need to find a more concept ual and shared way of 
describing them. Also, some companies use business models as a concept to Business 
Strategy 
Business  
Organisation ICT Business 
Model 
   
  Customer 
Demand Legal 
Environment Competitive  
Forces 
Technological 
Change Social 
Environment Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial
Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial
Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial
Formatted: Font: (Default) Arial
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  16 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci evolve from a specific state of their business mode l to a designed and desired 
new business model. Linder and Cantrell [2000] call  these models ‘change 
models’, which they classify into four basic types:  realization models, renewal 
models, extension models, and journey models (Figur e 6).  
 
Figure 6. Change Models [Linder and Cantrell 2000] 
 
The Parts are not the Whole 
A last common, but important, confusion related to the  business model concept 
is that many people speak about business models whe n they really only mean 
parts of a business model [Linder and Cantrell 2000 ]. An online auction, for 
example, is not a business model, but a pricing mec hanism and, as such, part of 
a business model (admittedly sometimes a dominant p art of the business model). 
Similarly, an online community is not a business mo del in itself, but potentially 
part of the customer relationship. Finally consider  revenue sharing. It is not a 
business model in itself either, but a way of explo iting partnerships to address the 
customer and distribute the resulting revenues. In our opinion, a business model 
needs to be understood as a much more holistic conc ept that embraces all such 
elements as pricing mechanisms, customer relationsh ips, partnering, and 
revenue sharing [Afuah and Tucci 2003; Osterwalder and Pigneur 2004]. Journey model 
Extension model 
Renewal model 
Realization model 
No business 
model change Business model 
change Degree to 
which core 
logic changes  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  17 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Recapitulation 
Recapitulating, we propose the following understand ings about the business 
model concept's place in the firm. First, the busin ess model can be seen as the 
conceptual link between strategy, business organiza tion, and systems. The 
business model as a system shows how the pieces of a business concept fit 
together, while strategy also includes competition and implementation. 
Second, business model implementation contains its translation into concrete 
things, such as a business structure (e.g. departme nts, units, human resources), 
business processes (e.g. workflows, responsibilitie s) and infrastructure and 
systems (e.g. buildings, ICT). Business models are subject to external pressure 
and thus constantly subject to change.  
III. DOMAINS ADDRESSED IN A BUSINESS MODEL 
To identify the most common building blocks among b usiness models in the  
literature, we compared the models mentioned most o ften and studied their 
components. From this synthesis, nine building bloc ks emerge that cover all the 
business model components mentioned by at least two  authors. We excluded all 
elements related to competition and to business mod el implementation, which we 
understand as related to the business model but not  as internal part of it. The 
nine blocks are outlined in Table 3 and are discuss ed in more depth in 
Osterwalder and Pigneur [2004].  
Based on the literature synthesis leading to the ni ne building blocks we propose 
the following definition for business models: 
Business Model Definition:   
A business model is a conceptual tool that contains  a set of 
elements and their relationships and allows express ing the 
business logic of a specific firm.  It is a description of the value a 
company offers to one or several segments of custom ers and of the 
architecture of the firm and its network of partner s for creating, 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  18 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci marketing, and delivering this value and relationsh ip capital, to 
generate profitable and sustainable revenue streams . 
Table 3. Nine Business Model Building Blocks 
Pillar Business Model 
Building Block  Description 
Product Value Proposition Gives an overall view of a company's bundle of prod ucts 
and services. 
Target Customer  Describes the segments of customers a company wants  to 
offer value to. 
Distribution Channel Describes the various means of the company to get i n 
touch with its customers. Customer Interface 
Relationship Explains the kind of links a company establishes be tween 
itself and its different customer segments. 
Value Configuration Describes the arrangement of ac tivities and resources. 
Core Competency Outlines the competencies necessary to execute the 
company's business model.  Infrastructure 
Management 
Partner Network Portrays the network of cooperative agreements with  other 
companies necessary to efficiently offer and commer cialize 
value. 
Cost Structure Sums up the monetary consequences of the means 
employed in the business model. Financial Aspects 
Revenue Model Describes the way a company makes money through a 
variety of revenue flows. 
 
Table 4 and Table 5 name the components proposed by  the different authors and 
show how they relate to the nine building blocks. E lements mentioned by only 
one author and not covered by the nine building blo cks are, for example the 
capital model and the market model [Petrovic, Kittl  et al. 2001]. Though the 
former is important to realize and implement a busi ness model, it is not part of it 
[Chesbrough and Rosenbloom 2002]. Similarly, we bel ieve that the latter is 
important to situate a business model in the compet itive landscape but is not part 
of it. Some authors mention elements related to bus iness model implementation 
in their approach [Linder and Cantrell 2000; Afuah and Tucci 2003] that we do 
not conceive as internal to the business model but related to its execution.  
The main idea of identifying the domains, concepts and relationships addressed 
in the business model field is to create a common l anguage. That is,  creating a 
reference model shared among a specific community o f practice or creating a 
more formal ontology of the business model domain. In this context an ontology 
can be understood as an explicit specification of a  conceptualization [Gruber 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  19 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci 1993] and would define the terms, concepts, and rel ationships of business 
models. 
 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  1 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Table 4. Domains Addressed in Business Models (part  1) 
Business model 
ontology Stähler 2001 Weill and Vitale 
2001 Petrovic, Kittl et 
al. Gordijn 2002 Afuah and Tucci 
2003 Tapscott, Ticoll 
et al. 2000 Linder and 
Cantrell 2000 
Value 
Proposition value proposition Value 
Proposition, 
strategic 
objective Value Model Value offering Customer Value  value proposition 
Target Customer  Customer 
Segments  Market Segment Scope   
Distribution 
Channel  Channels Customer 
relations model    channel model 
Customer 
Relationship   Customer 
relations model    commerce 
relationship 
Value 
Configuration Architecture  Production Mode e3-value 
configuration connected 
activities, value 
configuration b-webs commerce 
process model 
Capability  Core 
competencies, 
CSF Resource Model  capabilities   
Partnership Architecture e-business 
schematics  Actors sustainability 
(team-up 
strategy) b-webs  
Cost Structure    Value exchange cost structure   
Revenue Model Revenue Model Source of 
revenue Revenue Model value exchange pricing, revenue 
source  pricing model, 
revenue model 
 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  2 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Table 5. Domains Addressed in Business Models (part  2) 
Business model 
ontology Hamel 2000 Mahadevan 
2000 Chesbrough and 
Rosenbloom 
2000 Magretta 2002 Amit and Zott 
2001 Applegate and 
Collura 2001 Maitland and 
Van de Kar 2002 
Value 
Proposition Product/market 
scope Value stream Value proposition What does the 
customer value? Transaction 
component Product and 
Services offered Value 
proposition, 
assumed value 
Target Customer Market scope  Market segment Who is the 
customer?  Market 
opportunity Market segment 
Distribution 
Channel Fulfillment & 
support, info & 
insight   How can we 
deliver value at 
an appropriate 
cost?  Marketing/sales 
model  
Customer 
Relationship Relationship 
dynamics     Brand and 
reputation  
Value 
Configuration Core processes Logistical stream Structure of the 
value chain  Architectural 
configuration Operating model  
Capability core 
competencies, 
strategic assets     Organization and 
culture, 
management 
model)  
Partnership suppliers, 
partners, 
coalitions  Position in the 
value chain  Transaction 
component Partners Companies 
involved in 
creating value 
Cost Structure   Cost structure What is the 
underlying 
economic vale?    
Revenue Model pricing structure Revenue stream  How do we make 
money in this 
business  Benefits to firm 
and stakeholders Revenue Model 
 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  19 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci IV. USE AND POTENTIAL OF THE BUSINESS MODEL CONCEPT  
Because business model research is a rather young r esearch domain it must still 
prove its relevance. Its main area of contribution could be in the creation of 
concepts and tools that help manager to capture, un derstand, communicate, 
design, analyze, and change the business logic of t heir firm.  
In the following subsections we outline some of the  general roles that the 
literature proposes for the business model concept (i.e. for the use of formally 
described business models). We identified five cate gories of functions, which are: 
• understanding and sharing,  
• analyzing,  
• managing,  
• prospects and  
• patenting of business models.  
In section V we will describe the business model co ncept's role in IS. 
 UNDERSTAND AND SHARE 
Business models help to capture, visualize, underst and, communicate and share 
the business logic. 
Capture .  
Although a company’s business model is a simplified  representation of its 
business concept. it is rarely described explicitel y in a conceptual way. 
Experience shows that in many cases people are not always capable of 
communicating their business model in a clear way [ Linder and Cantrell 2000]. 
Furthermore, because people use different mental mo dels, they do not 
automatically understand the a business model in th e same way. Thus, a generic 
and shared concept for describing business models b ecomes necessary. Such a 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  20 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci framework can be understood as a common language be tween stakeholders to 
formulate business models in a way that everybody u nderstands.  
Visualize   
Humans are quite limited in their ability to proces s complex information.  As can 
be shown theoretically and empirically, processing information through the visual 
system can substantially increases the degree to wh ich complexity can be 
handled successfully [Rode 2000]. Using a conceptua lization to capture business 
models, means that with little additional effort th ey can be presented graphically 
[Gordijn and Akkermans 2003].  
Understand  
Modern business models are increasingly complex, pa rticularly those with strong 
ICT and e-business components. The relationship bet ween the different 
elements of a business model and the decisive succe ss factors are not always 
immediately observable. Therefore the process of mo deling social systems and, 
in this case, business models help identify and und erstand the relevant elements 
in a specific domain and the relationships among th em [Morecroft 1994; Ushold 
and King 1995]. In addition, the visual representat ion of a business model usually 
enhances understanding.  
Communicate and Share  
We already made the point that the business model c oncept helps in capturing, 
understanding, and visualizing the business logic o f company. Being able to 
communicate and share this understanding with other  stakeholders is simply a 
logical consequence of the foregoing. Formalizing b usiness models and 
expressing them in a more tangible way clearly help  managers to communicate 
and share their understanding of a business among o ther stakeholders [Fensel 
2001]. This capabilityis particularly important for  the dialogue between people 
with different backgrounds, such as managers and sy stems architects and 
engineers. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  21 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci ANALYZE 
The business model concept can contribute in analyz ing the business logic of a 
company. The business model becomes a  new unit of analysis [Stähler 2002]. 
Business models can improve measuring, observing, a nd comparing the 
business logic of a company.  
Measure 
Having captured the business model, it may become e asier to identify the 
relevant measures to follow to improve management. This ability would facilitate 
the choice of the indicators of an executive inform ation system for monitoring 
strategy implementation [Camponovo and Pigneur 2004 ],  using for example a 
balanced scorecard approach with its financial, cus tomer, internal business, and 
innovation perspectives [Kaplan and Norton 1992]. T he scorecard  is all the more 
relevant since in e-business the indicators to foll ow are still an issue of debate. 
Track and Observe.  
The business logic of a company constantly changes because of inside and 
outside pressures, as shown in Section III. Therefo re a structured approach to 
business models is important to understand which pa rticular issues e changed 
over time.  
Compare  
Similar to observing a company's business model ove r time, a structured 
approach allows companies to compare their business  model to those of their 
competitors. This is based on the reasoning that th ings are only comparable if 
they are understood in the same way. Furthermore, c omparing one's business 
model to one of a company in a completely different  industry may provide new 
insights and foster business model innovation. Rela ted to e-business and to 
dynamic industries comparisons can help incumbents understand how 
aggressive new competitors and startups work.  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  22 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci MANAGE 
Business models  improve the management of the busi ness logic of the firm. The 
business model concept helps ameliorate the design,  planning, changing and 
implementation of business models. In addition, wit h a business model approach 
companies can react faster to changes in the busine ss environment. Finally, the 
business model concept improves the alignment of st rategy, business 
organization and technology.  
Design   
Designing a coherent business model where all the e lements are mutually 
reinforcing or at least optimized individually is n ot an easy task. Because  
business models are quite complex, their success is  often based on the 
interaction of a number of apparently minor element s. This is even more the case 
since technology increases the range of imaginable business models [Lechner 
and Hummel 2002]. Having a business model conceptua lization at hand that 
describes the essential building blocks and their r elationships makes it easier for 
managers to design a sustainable business model.  
Plan, Change and Implement 
When a company decides to adopt a new business mode l or to change an 
existing one, capturing and visualizing this model will improve planning, change 
and implementation (Figure 7). It is much easier to  go from one point to another, 
 
Figure 7: Planning, Changing and Implementing Busin ess Models Business 
Model New 
Business  
Time 
tfuture  t0 
The management analyzes the current 
business model's adequacy to environmental 
pressures and designs a new business model 
if necessary  The new business model 
becomes a goal to achieve and 
guides planning, change and 
implementation  plan, change,  
implement 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  23 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci when one can exactly understand, say and show what elements will change. In 
this regard, Linder and Cantrell [2000] speak of so -called change models that are 
the core logic for how a firm will change over time  to remain profitable in a 
dynamic environment. 
React.  
Capturing, mapping and understanding create the fou ndation for improving 
speed and appropriateness of reaction to external p ressures. A conceptualized 
business model helps business model designers to mo dify certain elements of an 
existing business model [Petrovic, Kittl et al. 200 1]. This is without doubt 
essential in an uncertain and rapidly changing comp etitive landscape. 
Align   
In Section 3 we argued that the business model conc ept can serve as a federator 
among the triangle of business strategy, business o rganization and technology. 
In other words, the business model forms a sort of conceptual bridge that makes 
it easier to align these three. Chesbrough and Rose nbloom [2000], for example, 
see business models as a mediating construct betwee n technology and 
economic value. The business model concept could be come an important tool to 
further develop and improve existing methods of bus iness and IS alignment 
[Osterwalder and Pigneur 2003].  
Improve Decision Making .  
Having claimed that the business model concept enha nces understanding and 
communicating the business logic of the firm we ded uce that decision makers 
create more informed, and hence better, decisions b usiness models and 
decisions.[Hayes and Finnegan 2005]. Aside from thi s, business models are a 
new unit of analysis [Stähler 2002] that can be obs erved and compared, help 
defining measures and should therefore also improve  decisions. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  24 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci PROSPECT 
Business models describe possible futures for a com pany. We believe that the 
business model concept can help foster innovation a nd increase readiness for 
the future through business model portfolios and si mulation.  
Innovate  
Similar to the argument about improving change and increasing reaction 
capacities in the firm, we believe that a formal an d modular business model 
approach can foster innovation. Specifying a set of  business model elements and 
building blocks, as well as their relationships to one amother, is like giving a 
business model designer a box of Lego blocks [Burgi , Victor et al. 2004]. He or 
she can experiment with these blocks and create com pletely new business 
models, limited only by imagination and the pieces supplied. Amit and Zott [2001] 
explicitly perceive the business model as a locus o f innovation. Mitchell and 
Coles [2003] even see business model innovation as a source of competitive 
advantage.  
Business Model Portfolio .  
Based on Allen's law of excess of diversity in evol utionary theory [Allen 2001] 
one may argue that a company should maintain a port folio of business models in 
order to be ready for the future. The idea behind A llen's law is that a sustainable 
and successful evolutionary strategy requires an am ount of internal diversity 
superior to that of the environment. Allen suggests  that agents need to have a 
stock of potential strategies to be set off in the face of unpredictability in 
environmental change [Andriani 2001]. In the case o f a company, a stock of 
business models would allow it to cope with change.   
Simulate and Test   
Simulating and testing business models is a manager ’s dream. Though 
simulation will never be able to predict the future , it is a way of doing low-risk 
experiments, without endangering an organization [S terman 2000]. By simulating 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  25 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci and testing possible business models, managers will  be better prepared for the 
future. Similarly, in the domain of e-business, Ric hards and Morrison [2001] 
compare this kind of simulation tool to a sort of f light simulator that allows 
building better e-business strategies.  
PATENTING 
Increasingly entrepreneurs and companies in e-busin ess can patent e-business 
processes and even entire aspects of their business  model [Beresford 2001]. 
Therefore business modelling may potentially play a n  important role in this legal 
domain. For example, Priceline based much of its bu siness strategy on a patent 
whose technology matches bids from buyers with inte rested sellers on the Net 
[Angwin 2000]. Consequently, patenting of e-busines s methods created a 
number of legal battles. A famous one is the case b etween the online retailer 
Amazon.com and the online arm of the bookseller Bar nes & Noble (B&N). 
Amazon.com, who received a patent for its "one-clic k" ordering system, attacked 
B&N for patent infringement, supposedly caused by i ts "express lane" checkout 
system on the B&N website [Lesavich 2001]. It remai ns to be seen in what 
direction patenting business models and business pr ocesses moves.  
V. WHY DISCUSS BUSINESS MODELS IN INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS 
In this section we outline why it is important to d iscuss and understand the 
business model concept in the IS domain. Our discus sion proceeds as follows: 
• We present an argument that a conceptual approach is indispensable to 
designing new computer-based business model tools f ulfilling the roles 
discussed in Section IV.  
• We show how the business model concept can contrib ute to requirements 
engineering.  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  26 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci • We describe the connection between business models  and Information 
Systems in following company indicators (e.g. a bal anced scorecard].  
• We claim that capturing, mapping and following of  the business model of 
a firm is a form of knowledge management.  
• Finally, we reason about the business model’s role  in defining goals, 
workflows, and processes.  
SOFTWARE-BASES BUSINESS MODEL TOOLS 
A fundamental contribution of conceptual business m odels is in building the 
foundation for a set of new computer-assisted manag ement tools. The 
management literature is famous for producing conce pts and models and also 
produced a body of literature on business models. Y et, few of these concepts are  
translated into software-based tools, although, in our opinion such tools could 
provide enormous value to business and IS managemen t. For example, some  
business model functions principally make sense if digitized. Visualizing, 
designing, and comparing business models can be don e quickly when software-
based tools are available, but are a cumbersome tas k when executed on paper. 
More complex methods, such as simulation, are simpl y impossible without the 
help of computers. In software engineering we are a lready used to a variety of 
computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools.  Similarly we have a variety 
of tools for business process modeling and workflow  modeling at our disposition. 
On the contrary in the more value/customer oriented  field we have practically no 
tools. Yet, we estimate that computer-aided busines s engineering (CABE) or 
design (CABD) are promising areas. 
However, to use computer assistance, a more rigorou s conceptualization of the 
business model domain is required [Gordijn 2002; Os terwalder 2004]. Once the 
objects, elements, and relationships of the busines s model concept are defined,  
a set of software-based tools can be uilt to simpli fy the life of managers. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  27 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Proposition 1:  Rigorously defined meta-models of business models in the form 
of formal reference models or ontologies can help i n developing new software-
based management and IS tools. 
BUSINESS AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS ALIGNMENT 
Alignment between business strategy and Information  Systems  is a long-
standing key issue in IS management [Brancheau, Jan z et al. 1996]. A study of 
226 companies supports the hypothesis that alignmen t between business and IS 
strategies improves business performance [Sabherwal  and Chan 2001]. The link 
between IS/IT and business models is particularly s trong, since IT and IS have 
been a strong enabler for a variety of innovative b usiness models. Yet, despite 
the general recognition of the importance of strate gic IS alignment, not enough 
research reports on how such alignment is achieved and sustained over time 
[Hirschheim and Sabherwal 2001]. We believe that th e business model concept 
could contribute to the creation of a common unders tanding between business 
and IT/IS, lead to a strategic and functional integ ration, an efficient IT/IS 
infrastructure, and help choose the appropriate app lications and the right IT/IS 
structures.  
Mutual Understanding of IT/IS and Business 
The social dimension of linkage between business an d IS is defined as the level 
of mutual understanding of and commitment to the bu siness and IT mission, 
objectives, and plans [Reich and Benbasat 1996]. In  other words, business 
people must be able to formulate their vision clear ly and communicate what they 
expect from IS people. Conversely, and the  IS staf f must be able to point out 
how Information and Communication Technology (ICT) can improve a company's 
business goals (Figure 8)[Brews and Tucci 2003]. Ho wever, the business and 
technology communities  sometimes seem quite distan t. Every manager and 
entrepreneur understands intuitively how his busine ss works, but in many cases 
she or he is rarely able to communicate it in a cle ar and simple way [Linder et al., 
2001].Similarly, IS people know clearly what ICTs a re able to accomplish in IS 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  28 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci management, but they struggle to achieve a strategi c fit with the big (business) 
picture. We believe that the business model could b e the conceptual tool to 
capture, share, and create a common vision of a com pany's business model.  
 
Figure 8: Business Strategy and Information Systems  Alignment 
Proposition 2:  The business model concept helps increase the mutu al 
understanding between the business and IT/IS domain . It creates a common 
language and shared comprehension.  
Business and IT/IS integration (Mutual Reinforcemen t) 
Once the business and IS communities share a common  understanding of a 
company's business model they can jointly reflect o n how business strategy 
objectives drive the business model and the underly ing IT/IS or, the other way 
around, how IT/IS evolutions drive business model c hange and impact business 
strategy. This statement is a (business model) exte nsion of the well-known 
Strategic Alignment Model [Henderson and Venkatrama n 1999], which is defined 
in terms of four fundamental domains of strategic c hoice: business strategy, 
information technology strategy, organizational inf rastructure and processes, and 
information technology infrastructure and processes  (Figure 9). The model 
addresses strategic fit between IT/IS strategy and business strategy and 
functional integration between organizational infra structure and processes and 
IT/IS infrastructure and processes.  
Figure 9 illustrates how the business model concept  could serve as the tool to 
conceptualize and illustrate a company's business s trategy and objectives. It 
could then be integrated with its enterprise model (that represents the 
organizational infrastructure and processes) and th e IS model (that represents 
the informational infrastructure, applications and user interfaces).  Business  Business  
Model Information  
Systems Information Systems support 
the company's business model 
and are targeted on areas that 
are critical to successful 
business performa nce  Managers are aware of the use 
of Information Systems to 
realize goals, exploit 
opportunities and obtain 
competitive advantage  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  29 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci  Adapted from [Henderson and Venkatraman 1999]  
Figure 9: Business and IT/IS Alignment  
Proposition 3:  The business model concept improves the integratio n between 
the business and IT/IS domain and leads to mutual r einforcement because it 
creates a shared understanding.  
IT/IS Infrastructure and Applications 
Executives make few choices more critical than deci ding which information 
technology (IT) investments will be needed for futu re strategic agility [Weill and 
Vitale 2002]. But it is not yet clear what framewor ks assist them for making 
informed decisions about IT infrastructure and appl ications.  
We speculate that the business model concept could play an important role in 
these decisions. Our proposition would be to cross the nine basic building blocks 
describing a company's business model (Secton III) with Weill and Vitale's [2002] 
conceptualization of IT infrastructure services, wh ich they sub-divided into nine 
areas. Using this matrix as a basis for analysis it  may be able to achieve a better 
alignment between the business concept of a company  and the IT services 
provided by the IS department (Table 6).  
Similarly, we propose using the nine basic business  model building blocks to 
analyze a company's needs in terms of its IT applic ations portfolio [Ward 1988]. 
Understanding every element of the business model c ould allow a company to 
streamline its application portfolio and achieve a better fit with its business model 
Table 7. BUSINESS 
MODEL  IT 
STRATEGY  
Function 
integration Strategic 
fit BUSINESS IT 
strategy 
infrastructure  
IS 
INFRASTRUCTURE  ORGANIZATION  
INFRASTRUCTURE  Architecture  
Processes 
Skills  Technology scope  
System competencies 
IT governance 
Administrative structure  
Business processes 
Skills  VALUE proposition  
CUSTOMER interface 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
management  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  30 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Proposition 4:  Understanding a company's business model facilitat es and 
improves the choices of IT/IS infrastructure and it s application portfolio. 
Table 6. Infrastructure Alignment  
9 INFRASTRUCTURE 
SERVICES 
 
9 BUSINESS MODEL 
BUILDING BLOCKS 
Application 
Infrastructure 
Communications 
Management 
Data Management 
IT Management 
Security 
Architecture and 
Standards 
Channel 
Management 
IT Research and 
Development 
Training and 
Education in IT 
Value Proposition          
Target Customer          
Distribution Channel          
Relationship          
Value Configuration          
Capability          
Partnersh          
Cost Model          
Revenue Model          
Adapted from Weill and Vitale [2002] 
Table 7. Application Portfolio Management  
 Strategic Key Operational Support High Potential 
Value Proposition     
Target Customer     
Distribution Channel     
Relationship     
Value Configuration     
Capability     
Partnersh     
Cost Model     
Revenue Model     
Adapted from Ward [1988] 
IS Structure 
An organization's performance is related to its att aining the appropriate structure 
and capabilities to execute its strategic decisions . This process involves 
continuous adaptation and change in relation to a c ompany's strategy and 
business model. We hypothesize that a good knowledg e of a company's 
business model and its particulars can help to bett er define the IS role and 
structure [Hirschheim and Sabherwal 2001].  
Proposition 5:  Understanding a company's business model facilitat es its choices 
regarding IS role and structure. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  31 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING 
In line with the Strategic Alignment Model [Henders on and Venkatraman 1999] 
illustrated in Figure 9 we think the business model  concept can help improve 
requirements engineering. It seems particularly use ful in the process of defining 
business goals, which are prominent in the requirem ents engineering literature 
[Mylopoulos, Chung et al. 1999; van Lamsweerde 2003 ]. However, this literature 
says little on how these goals are to be defined. P articularly in the current  
environment where multi-actor value constellations are common (e.g. in 
electronic commerce) we need find innovative ways t o model business 
requirements and improve business–IT alignment [Gor dijn and Akkermans 2003]. 
Proposition 6:  The business model concept helps in defining a com pany's goals 
and consequently facilitates requirements engineeri ng.  
Table 8. Business Models and Goals for Requirements  Engineering 
9 BUSINESS MODEL BLOCKS Goal 1 Goal 2 Goal 3 Goal 4 
Value Proposition     
Target Customer     
Distribution Channel     
Relationship     
Value Configuration     
Capability     
Partnersh     
Cost Model     
Revenue Model     
 
BALANCED SCORECARD 
The balanced scorecard [Kaplan and Norton 1992] is a decision support tool at 
the strategic management level. It was also propose d to measure and evaluate 
IS activities [Martinsons, Davison et al. 1999]. We  propose to use the business 
model concept to improve balanced scorecard design by defining more adequate 
indicators. We argue that, with the business model captured, understood, and 
described it is easier to identify the indicators o f the executive information system 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  32 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci for monitoring the strategy, based on the financial , customer, internal business, 
and innovation and learning perspectives outlined i n the balanced scorecard 
approach [Kaplan and Norton 1992]. 
Proposition 7:  Understanding a company's business model facilitat es the 
identification of the indicators to follow in an ex ecutive management systems.  
Table 9. Business Model and Balanced Scorecard  
9 BUSINESS MODEL BLOCKS Indicator current score target score alarm level 
Value Proposition     
Target Customer     
Distribution Channel     
Relationship     
Value Configuration     
Capability     
Partnersh     
Cost Model     
Revenue Model     
Adapted from Kaplan and Norton [1992] 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
Capturing, storing, and following business models i n a company is a form of 
knowledge management that will increasingly gain im portance. The first step in 
managing business model knowledge is describing a c ompany's model explicitly. 
In knowledge management this externalisation is kno wn as the process of 
articulating tacit knowledge into explicit knowledg e (Nonaka, Toyama. et al. 
2000]. Conceptualizing business models plays an imp ortant role in externalizing 
business models. Similarly, a conceptualization of business processes led to the 
establishment of the well-known Process Handbook by  Malone, Crowston et al. 
[1999], a knowledge management system for business processes. An important 
advantage of capturing and storing business model k nowledge is that it can be 
visualized, communicated, shared, and manipulated e asily. Likewise, Kaplan and 
Norton [2000] talk of strategy maps that help manag ers capture and 
communicate both their strategy and the processes a nd systems involved.  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  33 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Proposition 8:  The business model concept helps externalizing, ma pping and 
storing knowledge about the value creation logic of  a company.  
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper we outlined the origins, the differen t understandings, and the 
evolution of the business model concept. We showed that the business model 
concept still needs explanation. In this paper we t ried to build the foundations to 
clarify understandings in the business model domain . Therefore we propose a 
business model terminology or ontology used to desc ribe business models. This 
terminology is compared to previous work on this to pic. Subsequently, we outline 
the general uses, roles, and potential of the busin ess model concept in the firm. 
Thereafter we discuss why it is particularly import ant to discuss the concept in 
relationship with Information Systems. Accordingly,  we sketch 8 propositions to 
be observed and eventually tested in future work.  
Recapitulating, we observe a large potential for th e business model concept 
especially in IS. One of the shortcomings in busine ss model literature is that the 
different authors rarely build on each other. Conse quently, business model 
research as a whole advances more slowly than it co uld and often stays at a 
superficial level.  
REFERENCES 
Abrahamson, E. and G. Fairchild (1999). "Management  Fashion: Lifecycles, 
Triggers, and Collective Learning Processes." Administrative Science 
Quarterly  (44)4, 708-40. 
Afuah, A. and C. Tucci (2003).  Internet Business Models and Strategies . Boston: 
McGraw Hill. 
Aguilar-Savén, R. S. (2004). "Business Process Mode lling: Review and 
Framework" International Journal of Production Economics . (90) 129-149. 
Allen, P. M. (2001). "A Complex Systems Approach to  Learning in Adaptive 
Networks." International Journal of Innovation Management  5(2) 149-180. 
Amit, R. and C. Zott (2001). "Value Creation in e-B usiness." Strategic 
Management Journal  (22)6-7, 493-520. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  34 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Andriani, P. (2001). "Diversity, Knowledge and Comp lexity Theory: Some 
Introductory Issues." International Journal of Innovation Management  (5)2, 
257-274. 
Angwin, J. (2000). 'Business-Method' Patents, Key t o Priceline, Draw Growing 
Protest. Wall Street Journal - Eastern Edition  
Applegate, L. M. (2001). "E-business Models: Making  sense of the Internet 
business landscape" in Information Technology and the Future Enterprise: 
New Models for Managers  G. Dickson, W. Gary and G. DeSanctis. Upper 
Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall. 
Bambury, P. (1998). "A taxonomy of Internet Commerc e." First Monday  3(10). 
Barabba, V., C. Huber, et al. (2002). "A multimetho d approach for creating new 
business models: The General Motors OnStar project. " Interfaces  32(1): 
20-34. 
Bellman, R., C. Clark, et al. (1957). "On the Const ruction of a Multi-Stage, Multi-
Person Business Game." Operations Research  5(4): 469- 503. 
Beresford, K. (2001). "European patents for softwar e, E-commerce and business 
model inventions." World Patent Information  23(3): 253-263. 
Bernus, P. (2001). "Some thoughts on enterprise mod elling." Production 
Planning & Control  12: 110-118. 
Brancheau, J. C., B. Janz, et al. (1996). "Key issu es in information systems 
management: 1994-95 SIM Delphi results." MIS Quarterly 20(2): 225-242. 
Brews, P. J. and C. Tucci (2003). "Building Interne t Generation Companies: 
Lessons from the Front Lines of the Old Economy." Academy of 
Management Executive  17(4). 
Burgi, P., B. Victor, et al. (2004). "Case study: m odeling how their business really 
works prepares managers for sudden change." Strategy & Leadership  
32(2): 28. 
Camponovo, G. and Y. Pigneur (2004). " Information Systems Alignment in 
Uncertain Environments ." Proceedings of Decision Support Systems  
(DSS). 
Chesbrough, H. and R. S. Rosenbloom (2000). The Role of the Business Model 
in capturing value from Innovation: Evidence from X EROX Corporation’s 
Technology Spinoff Companies . Boston, Massachusetts, Harvard 
Business School. 
Chesbrough, H. and R. S. Rosenbloom (2002). "The ro le of the business model 
in capturing value from innovation: evidence from X erox Corporation's 
technology spin-off companies." Industrial and Corporate Change  11(3): 
529-555. 
Doumeingts, G. and Y. Ducq (2001). "Enterprise mode lling techniques to improve 
efficiency of enterprises." Production Planning & Control  12: 146-163. 
Fensel, D. (2001). Ontologies: Silver Bullet for Knowledge Management and 
Electronic Commerce . Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. 
Galper, J. (2001). "Three Business Models for the S tock Exchange Industry." 
Journal of Investing  10(1): 70-78. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  35 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Gebauer, J. and M. Ginsburg (2003). "The US Wine In dustry and the Internet: An 
Analysis of Success factors for Online Business mod els." Electronic 
Markets  13(1): 59-66. 
Genesereth, M. R. and N. J. Nilsson (1987). Logical Foundation of Artificial 
Intelligence . Los Altos, California: Morgan Kaufmann. 
Gordijn, J. (2002). Value-based Requirements Engineering - Exploring In novative 
e-Commerce Ideas . Doctoral Dissertation. Amsterdam, NL, Vrije 
Universiteit. 
Gordijn, J. and H. Akkermans (2003). "Value-based r equirements engineering: 
exploring innovative e-commerce ideas." Requirements Engineering  8(2): 
114 - 134. 
Gordijn, J. and J. M. Akkermans (2003). "Does e-Bus iness Modeling Really 
Help?" 36th Hawaii International Conference On System Scie nces, 
Hawaii. 
Gordijn, J., J. M. Akkermans, et al. (2000). "Busin ess Modelling is not Process 
Modelling". Proceedings of ECOMO . 
Gruber, T. (1993). "A translation approach to porta ble ontologies." Knowledge 
Acquisition  5(2): 199-220. 
Hamel, G. (2000). Leading the revolution . Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press. 
Hayes, J. and P. Finnegan (2005). "Assessing the of  potential of e-business 
models: towards a framework for assisting decision- makers." European 
Journal of Operational Research  160(2): 365-379. 
Henderson, J. C. and N. Venkatraman (1999). "Strate gic alignment: Leveraging 
information technology for transforming organizatio ns". IBM Systems 
Journal, IBM Corporation/IBM Journals. 38: 472. 
Hirschheim, R. and R. Sabherwal (2001). "Detours in  the Path toward Strategic 
Information Systems Alignment." California Manageme nt Review 44(1): 
87-108. 
Jones, G. M. (1960). "Educators, Electrons, and Bus iness Models: A Problem in 
Synthesis." Accounting Review  35(4): 619-626. 
Kaplan, R. S. and D. P. Norton (1992). "The balance d scorecard--measures that 
drive performance." Harvard Business Review  70(1). 
Kaplan, R. S. and D. P. Norton (2000). "Having Trou ble with Your Strategy? 
Then Map It." Harvard Business Review 78(5): 167-276. 
Kraemer, K. L., J. Dedrick, et al. (2000). "Redefin ing and extending the business 
model with information technology: Dell Computer Co rporation." The 
Information Society(16): 5-21. 
Krueger, C., K. van der Beek, et al. (2004). "New A nd Emerging Business 
Models For Online News: A Survey Of 10 European Cou ntries." 
Proceedings of the 17th Bled eCommerce Conference. 
Lechner, U. and J. Hummel (2002). "Business models and system architectures 
of virtual communities: From a sociological phenome non to peer-to-peer 
architectures." International Journal of Electronic  Commerce 6(3): 41-53. 
Lesavich, S. (2001). "Are All Business Method Paten ts 'One-Click' Away from 
Vulnerability?" Intellectual Property & Technology Law Journal 13(6): 1-5. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  36 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Linder, J. and S. Cantrell (2000). "Changing Busine ss Models: Surveying the 
Landscape" accenture Institute for Strategic Change . 
MacInnes, I., J. Moneta, et al. (2002). "Business M odels for Mobile Content: The 
Case of M-Games." Electronic Markets  12(4): 218-227. 
Magretta, J. (2002). "Why Business Models Matter." Harvard Business Review  
80(5): 86-92. 
Magretta, J. (2002). "Why business models matter." Harvard Business Review  
80(5): 86-+. 
Mahadevan, B. (2000). "Business Models for Internet -based e-Commerce: An 
anatomy." California Management Review  42(4): 55-69. 
Malone, T. W., K. Crowston, et al. (1999). "Tools f or Inventing Organizations: 
Toward a Handbook of Organizational Processes." Management Science , 
45: 425. 
Mansfield, G. M. and L. C. H. Fourie (2004). "Strat egy and business models -- 
strange bedfellows? A case for convergence and its evolution into 
strategic architecture." South African Journal of Business Management , 
South African Journal of Business Management. 35: 3 5-44. 
Martinsons, M., R. Davison, et al. (1999). "The bal anced scorecard: a foundation 
for the strategic management of information systems ." Decision Support 
Systems  25(1): 71-88. 
McKay, A. and Z. Radnor (1998). "A characterization  of a business process." 
International Journal of Operations & Production Ma nagement  18: 924. 
Mitchell, D. and C. Coles (2003). "The ultimate com petitive advantage of 
continuing business model innovation. " Journal of Business Strategy  24: 
15. 
Morecroft, J. D. (1994). "Executive Knowledge, Mode ls, and Learning. " In 
Morecroft. Modeling for Learning Organizations . J. D. Morecroft and J. D. 
Sterman. Portland: Productivity Press: 3-28. 
Mylopoulos, J., L. Chung, et al. (1999). "From obje ct-oriented to goal-oriented 
requirements analysis." Communications of the ACM 42(1): 31-37. 
Nonaka, I., R. Toyama, et al. (2000). "SECI, Ba and  Leadership: a Unified Model 
of Dynamic Knowledge Creation. " Long Range Planning . 33: 5-34. 
Osterwalder, A. (2004). The Business Model Ontology - a proposition in a de sign 
science approach . Dissertation, University of Lausanne, Switzerland : 173. 
Osterwalder, A. and Y. Pigneur (2003). "Towards Str ategy and Information 
Systems Alignment through a Business Model Ontology . " Proceedings of 
the Annual Conference of the Strategic Management S ociety . 
Osterwalder, A. and Y. Pigneur (2004). "An ontology  for e-business models." in 
Value Creation from E-Business Models . W. Currie, Butterworth-
Heinemann. 
Pateli, A. and G. Giaglis (2003). "A Framework For Understanding and Analysing 
e-Business Models. " Proceedings of the Bled Electronic Commerce 
Conference. 
Petrovic, O., C. Kittl, et al. (2001). "Developing Business Models for eBusiness." 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Elec tronic Commerce.  
Porter, M. E. (2001). "Strategy and the Internet." Harvard Business Review.  
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  37 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Rappa, M. (2001). "Managing the digital enterprise - Business models on the 
Web, " North Carolina State University. [accessed J une 2004]. 
 http://digitalenterprise.org/models/models.html 
Rappa, M. (2004). "The utility business model and t he future of computing 
services." IBM Systems Journal  43(1): 32-43. 
Reich, B. H. and I. Benbasat (1996). "Measuring the  linkage between business 
and information technology objectives." MIS Quarterly , MIS Quarterly & 
The Society for Information Mgt. 20: 55. 
Richards, I. and J. Morrison (2001). "Using flight simulators to build robust dot-
com strategies." Working Paper, Accenture . 
Rode, C. (2000). "In the Eye of the Beholder - Visu al and Verbal Cognitive 
Capacities in Complex Problem Solving. " Working Pa per, Think Tools 
AG. 
Sabherwal, R. and Y. E. Chan (2001). "Alignment Bet ween Business and IS 
Strategies: A Study of Prospectors, Analyzers, and Defenders." 
Information Systems Research  12(1): 11-33. 
Seddon, P. B., G. P. Lewis, et al. (2004). "The Cas e for Viewing Business 
Models as Abstraction of Strategy." Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems 13: 427-442. 
Shelley, L. (2003). "Trafficking in Women: The Busi ness Model Approach." 
Brown Journal of World Affairs  10(1): 119-131. 
Shubar, A. and U. Lechner (2004). "The Public WLAN Market And Its Business 
Models - An Empirical Study." Proceedings of the 17th Bled eCommerce 
Conference . 
Stähler, P. (2001). Geschäftsmodelle in der digitalen Ökonomie. Merkmal e, 
Strategien und Auswirkungen . Dissertation. University of St.Gallen HSG. 
Stähler, P. (2002). "Business Models as an Unit of Analysis for Strategizing." 
Proceedings of the 1 st International Workshop on Business Models.  
Sterman, J. D. (2000). Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling fo r a 
Complex World . Boston: McGraw-Hill. 
Tapscott, D., D. Ticoll, et al. (2000). Digital Capital – Harnessing the Power of 
Business Webs . Boston: Harvard Business School Press. 
Timmers, P. (1998). "Business Models for Electronic  Markets." Journal on 
Electronic Markets  8(2): 3-8. 
Ushold, M. and M. King (1995). "Towards a Methodolo gy for Building 
Ontologies." Proceedings of the Workshop on Basic Ontological Is sues in 
Knowledge Sharing held in conjunction with IJCAI . 
van Lamsweerde, A. (2003). "From System Goals to So ftware Architecture." in  
Formal Methods for Software Architectures . M. Bernardo and P. Inverardi, 
Springer-Verlag: 25-43. 
Ward, J. M. (1988). "Information Systems and Techno logy Application Portfolio 
Management--an Assessment of Matrix-Based Analyses. " Journal of 
Information Technology  3(3): 205-215. 
Weill, P., M. Subramani, et al. (2002). "Building I T Infrastructure for Strategic 
Agility." MIT Sloan Management Review  44: 57. 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  38 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Weill, P. and M. Vitale (2002). "What IT infrastruc ture capabilities are needed to 
implement e-business models?" MIS Quarterly  1(1): 17-34. 
Weill, P. and M. R. Vitale (2001). Place to space: Migrating to eBusiness Models . 
Boston: Harvard Business School Press. 
Wortmann, J. C., H. M. H. Hegge, et al. (2001). "Un derstanding enterprise 
modelling from product modelling." Production Planning & Control  12: 234-
244. 
Yousept, I. and F. Li (2004). "Online Supermarkets:  Emerging Strategies And 
Business Models In The UK." Proceedings of the 17th   Bled  eCommerce  
Conference. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
PLEASE ADD UP TO 150 WORDS ABOUT EACH AUTHOR 
Alexander Osterwalder  is a senior research fellow at the University of L ausanne 
and works as a business model design consultant and  manager. He is currently 
working on the design, implementation and managemen t of the business model 
of the Constellation for AIDS Competence, a new glo bal NGO based in Chiang 
Mai Thailand. The Constellation fights HIV/AIDS ( www.aidscompetence.org ) by 
connecting local responses globally. Alexander has a Ph.D. in Management 
Information Systems (MIS) from the University of La usanne, and a degree in 
Political Science and MIS. His research interests f ocus on business models, 
business innovation, technology and developing coun tries and the alignment 
between strategy and Information Systems (IS). Befo re joining the Constellation 
and founding the consultancy firm BusinessModelDesi gn.com Alexander has 
worked as a research fellow, entrepreneur, consulta nt and journalist. He is a 
founding member of the Open World Initiative (OWI) of the Evian Group at the 
IMD, Lausanne. 
Yves Pigneur  is  
Christopher L. Tucci  is 
Copyright © 2005 by the Association for Information  Systems. Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or co mmercial advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and full citation on the first page. Copyrig ht for components of this work owned by others 
than the Association for Information Systems must b e honored. Abstracting with credit is 
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  39 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post  on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires 
prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permi ssion to publish from: AIS Administrative 
Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712 Attn:  Reprints or via e-mail from  ais@aisnet.org  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISSN: 1529-3181                                            
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Paul Gray 
Claremont Graduate University 
AIS SENIOR  EDITORIAL BOARD 
Detmar Straub 
Vice President Publications  
Georgia State University Paul Gray                                 
Editor, CAIS                                
Claremont Graduate University Sirkka Jarvenpaa 
Editor, JAIS 
University of Texas at Austin 
Edward A. Stohr 
Editor-at-Large 
Stevens Inst. of Technology Blake Ives                                
Editor, Electronic Publications  
University of Houston Reagan Ramsower 
Editor, ISWorld Net 
Baylor University 
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD   
Gordon Davis 
University of Minnesota  Ken Kraemer 
Univ. of Calif. at Irvine M.Lynne Markus  
Bentley College Richard Mason 
Southern Methodist Univ.   
Communications of AIS, Volume 15, Article                                                                  40 
Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and F uture of the Concept by  
A. Ostenwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C.L. Tucci Jay Nunamaker                    
University of Arizona Henk Sol 
Delft  University Ralph Sprague 
University of Hawaii Hugh J. Watson 
University of Georgia  
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS  
Steve Alter 
U. of San Francisco Chris Holland 
Manchester Bus. School Jaak Jurison 
Fordham University Jerry Luftman 
Stevens Inst.of Technology 
CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD   
Tung Bui 
University of Hawaii Fred Davis 
U.ofArkansas, Fayetteville  Candace Deans 
University of Richmond Donna Dufner 
U.of Nebraska -Omaha 
Omar El Sawy  
Univ. of Southern Calif. Ali Farhoomand 
University of Hong Kong  Jane Fedorowicz 
Bentley College Brent Gallupe 
Queens University 
Robert L.  Glass 
Computing Trends Sy Goodman  
Ga. Inst.  of Technology Joze Gricar 
University of Maribor Ake Gronlund 
University of Umea,  
Ruth Guthrie 
California State Univ. Alan Hevner 
Univ. of South Florida Juhani Iivari 
Univ. of Oulu Claudia Loebbecke 
University of Cologne 
Michel Kalika 
U. of Paris Dauphine Munir Mandviwalla 
Temple University Sal March 
Vanderbilt University Don McCubbrey  
University of Denver 
Michael Myers 
University of Auckland Seev Neumann                                      
Tel Aviv University Dan Power  
University of No. Iowa Ram Ramesh 
SUNY-Buffalo 
Kelley Rainer 
Auburn University Paul Tallon 
Boston College Thompson Teo 
Natl. U. of Singapore Doug Vogel  
City Univ. of Hong Kong 
Rolf Wigand  
U. of Arkansas,LittleRock Upkar Varshney  
Georgia State Univ. Vance Wilson 
U.of Wisconsin,Milwaukee Peter Wolcott 
U. of Nebraska-Omaha 
Ping Zhang 
Syracuse University    
  
DEPARTMENTS 
Global Diffusion of the Internet.  
Editors: Peter Wolcott and Sy Goodman Information Technology and Systems.  
Editors: Alan Hevner and Sal March  
Papers in French 
Editor: Michel Kalika Information Systems and Healthcare 
Editor: Vance Wilson  
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL                                                                              
Eph McLean  
AIS, Executive Director 
Georgia State University Samantha Spears 
Subscriptions Manager 
Georgia State University Reagan Ramsower 
Publisher, CAIS 
Baylor University 
 
