
DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 02
A new class of company is emerging – one that uses collaborative technologies intensively 
to connect the internal efforts of employees and to extend the organization’s reach to customers, partners and supplier.” In just one sentence, this quote from a McKinsey study summarizes the huge impact online communities have on businesses today. In today’s competitive marketplace, companies are working to maximize their opportunities through valuable relationships. Online communities can achieve this goal by connecting, engaging and extending relationships with customers, employees and partners. Spanning verticals such as retail, financial services, high tech and more, companies have discovered a strong use case for online communities:
86% of Fortune 500 companies said communities provide insight into customer needs. 64% of companies stated community has improved their decision-making.Success from the Ground Up
BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY
Customer service is 
evolving at a rapid pace 
in order  to keep pace 
with customers;  but is 
the pace fast enough?

DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 03
Online communities present multiple opportunities for enhanced 
business value. They create an experience that helps businesses achieve their goals, whether it’s acquiring new customers or 
increasing insight into consumers needs and wants. However, 
in order to be effective, companies must be sincerely interested in knowing the needs of their audience, create an engagement strategy, and lay the groundwork for enhancing the community 
experience overtime.    
To help organizations succeed in their efforts, we bring this 
guide to you with the knowledge we have gained while 
working with some of today’s most successful and innovative companies including eBay, Epic Games, LinkedIn, Microsoft and Pixar. Our goal is to educate organizations on the best practices necessary to create engaged, vibrant and successful 
online communities.  Laying the Foundation for a 
Strong Online Community 
An online community is a powerful way to build engagement and 
nurture relationships. However, many companies often struggle with how to get started. This need not be a daunting process.
Here are five tips to help you build a strong, effective online 
community: 
1. KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE
Who is posting about your company? What are they 
saying? How are competitors positioning themselves in the marketplace? Before outlining goals for your community, understand the needs and wants of your members, as well as your management team, and research how to position 
yourself as a strong online resource. By analyzing the current 
situation, you will have the knowledge necessary to start relevant conversations, build relationships, and establish a foundation that will foster community growth. 
2. ESTABLISH COMMUNITY CULTURE  
For an online community to be successful, it must be sustainable and supported by senior management. Sustainability is created through engagement and emotional connection to the brand. Focus on building an online community where members discuss questions 
and answers and collaborate with one another, not just 

DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 04
your online brand. Quality conversation adds value to 
the customer experience, retains and attracts community members, and transforms users into brand advocates. Participation by senior executives reinforces the company’s commitment to the community among employees and 
customers. Reward active community members by inviting 
them to lead online webinars or chats, give them an expert badge, or grant them moderator status in niche topic discussions. This will lead to quality engagement and provide 
an incentive for members to actively participate. 
 3. BUILD COMMUNITY VISIBILITY 
Community members may drive online conversation, but it falls to you to inform your audience. There are many simple ways to promote your online community. Schedule monthly 
live chats to further engagement on popular topics. Use email 
alerts to notify members of new discussion opportunities. Or, send email newsletters highlighting community activity. This tactic not only promotes your online community, but also 
sparks interest, invites others to join the conversation, and 
increases web traffic. 
4. SHOWCASE PERSONALITY 
Put yourself in the shoes of your community members; would you rather interact with someone that is dry and boring, or someone with an interesting personality and a relatable 
story? As an online brand, everything you do – messaging, website design, customer service – makes a statement about 
your brand. Make your community a place where members 
are excited to be. Whether it’s quirky, conventional, formal or 
casual, adding personality to your online community creates a personable connection and can lead to transparent, long-lasting relationships. 
5. PROVE YOUR COMMUNITY’S ROI 
A strong community attracts new members, retains current users, and can potentially transform audience members into customers. Online communities are an investment in the 
success of your company – remember to show the return on 
that investment. Review metrics, improve where necessary, and track numbers back to your business goals. 
Use gamification to 
reward community members with badges, reputation points and 
expert status
DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 05
Effectively Drive Engagement 
in Your Online Community  
Once companies determine the purpose and goals of their 
community, they transition their focus to creating vibrant, active engagement. They want their online community to serve as an 
interactive forum where employees and customers can share 
ideas, help their peers, and discuss common interests. However, building the engagement necessary to sustain a successful, valuable community requires strategy and motivation on the 
organization’s part. 
Here are eight ways to drive engagement in your online community: 
1.  ESTABLISH CLEAR VISION AND GUIDELINES 
Communities can provide a variety of benefits – customer 
support, employee onboarding, ideation, Q&A, and user 
feedback. The objectives of the online community must be 
clear in order to produce a measurable return on investment. 
Further, guidelines must be set for community engagement. 
Once clarity is established on the purpose of an organization’s 
community and the rules that guide it, successful engagement will 
follow. Stakeholders will understand the roles they play and the 
expectations for their participation to maximize the opportunity 
for success. Community managers should monitor engagement to 
ensure it aligns with the organization’s objectives. 2.  POSITION COMMUNITY AS PART OF THE BRAND 
EXPERIENCE 
A company’s online community should reinforce its overall 
value proposition. It showcases the values of an organization – 
transparency, communication, innovation, and user satisfaction. 
When acquiring a new customer, position your community as a 
central feature in the new 
relationship. Also, remember 
to make create awareness 
for your community. Make 
it easy to find on your 
website and showcase it 
in marketing materials, 
customer communications, 
or internal newsletters. The 
more importance you place 
on your community, the more 
customers and employees will 
follow suit. 
3.  IDENTIFY AND REWARD COMMUNITY EXPERTS 
A successful community feeds on engagement. Therefore, it is 
important to identify and recognize community experts who actively 
share their insights and drive discussions with fellow members. 
Experts are the backbone of a community’s success. Reward their efforts and encourage them to continue their contributions.
DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 06
4.  CROWD-SOURCE NEW IDEAS 
When companies establish an environment where customers’ and 
employees’ voices can be heard, the results are far more powerful. Encourage community members to solve issues, provide insights, and share ideas. For example, invite customers to give suggestions on new features when building a product roadmap. Or, post a question asking 
employees for feedback on their onboarding experiences. This is an 
excellent way to inspire high value engagement. Make those who join your community feel welcome, important, and valued and community engagement will surge. Recognize contributors publicly, you cannot 
say “thank you” enough. 
5.  CREATE AN INSIDER GROUP 
Engagement is dependent on authentic relationships between 
a company and its community. An effective way to build engagement and transparency is an insider group. Insiders are influencers and possess insight into the needs and interests of 
your community.  
An insider group also enables community members to have a sense 
of ownership. Listen to their advice and opinions to create a more beneficial experience for your community members. 
6.  SPREAD THE WORD 
Email is one of the best ways to get the attention of users and get 
them coming back to your site. A newsletter is a great place to 
start, but you can look at a variety of ways to leverage email to get people involved in the community. 7.  APPOINT A COMMUNITY MANAGER 
Community Managers have two priorities – people and content. 
Building and maintaining meaningful relationships with customers is a core competency of any viable organization. Community Managers drive conversations and deepen the relationship consumers have with your brand. They grow membership and 
activity within the community, engage with new users, respond to 
questions and comments within the community, post questions and introduce new topics.  
Community Members must also govern the community and ensure 
that engagement aligns with the purpose of the community, addressing inappropriate posts and discussions if necessary.  
8.  IMPLEMENT SOLID COMMUNITY TOOLS 
Engagement cannot be created in a community built upon tools that are buggy or difficult to understand. The technology behind your community must be solid. One bad user experience can 
result in a lost community participant, and ultimately, create a 
detrimental impact on engagement.
Community Tools should also have 
moderation abilities that enable Admins to 
control permissions, private spaces, and more
DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 07
Measuring the Success of 
Your Online Community 
Once your community is established, it is important to evaluate 
the return on your investment and access where there are opportunities for improvement. Research shows communities can 
increase the average amount of customer spending, attract new 
customers, and reduce support costs: 
• Community users remain customers 50% longer than non-
community users [AT&T}. 
• 43% of support forum visits are in lieu of opening a support case [Cisco]. 
• Community users spend 54% more than non-community users [eBay]. 
• Community users have 4x as many page views as non-community users [McKinsey].  
• Customers report good experiences in forums 2x as often as 
they do via calls or mail [Jupiter].  
However, most organization don’t (or don’t know how to) measure their community’s ROI. 
There are many quantitative metrics that you can apply to your 
community including:   COMMUNITY GROWTH  
Although most community managers would love to see their 
audience reach thousands of users in just a few weeks, the odds 
of that happening are extremely slim. Communities are built upon 
trust and relationships, which take time to develop. However, it is still important to regularly review key metrics. How has your community grown over the past month? How about the past six months? Track how visitors arrive to your site and analyze results 
further to discover where the best quality traffic comes from.  
Also, review data to see how many members have transitioned into actively engaged contributors.  
LEVELS OF ENGAGEMENT  
Metrics related to engagement could include: 
• Growth in the number of posts contributed by community members 
• Numbers of comments on a blog post or article 
• Number of downloads for a specific document 
• Average response time to questions 
To increase these numbers, encourage community advocates to contribute content and reward them with expert status or user badges. When fellow members see one of their own featured in the 
community, they will become more inspired to contribute regularly.  
CONTENT POPULARITY  
Community members want content that answers questions and enables improved knowledge. Content should be continuously reevaluated and improved to better meet the needs of your audience. Review content clicks, bounce rates, and engagement (likes, 
DZONESOFTWARE.COM (919) 238 7100SUCCESS FROM THE GROUND UP: BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE ONLINE COMMUNITY PAGE 08
comments, and shares). This will show which content members find 
most useful and where there is opportunity for improvement.  
ACTIONS TIED TO REVENUE  
Although this metric is often more difficult to measure, tying member interactions to revenue is a big win for Community 
Managers. By integrating a marketing automation system or 
customer relationship management system (CRM) with your community, you can track actions such as clicks and downloads back to leads, conversions and sales.  
As you focus on these metrics, you will discover the strengths and 
weaknesses of your community. This insight enables companies to 
more effectively promote their communities, nurture engagement, 
and create a satisfactory experience for community members.   METRICS CHECKLIST: 
____ What are the inbound sources? 
____ How many people are viewing your content? ____ What content has the most clicks? ____ What content has the highest ranking or votes? ____ What content has the highest bounce rate? ____ What category is the most popular? ____ What category is the least popular? ____ What is the positive-to-negative rating ratio?  
         (Do people find the content helpful?) 
____ How is traffic changing week to week? Month to month?  
Online communities can deliver numerous benefits to businesses. 
From enhancing customer retention and crowdsourcing ideas, 
to customer service and brand awareness, communities are the 
answer.  To be successful, companies must first define the purpose of their community and identify their target audience. Once established, it is important to continuously gauge user needs, 
create quality engagement, and measure the community’s return 
on investment. 
Encourage community advocates to 
contribute content and reward them with 
expert status or user badges

About DZone Software 
DZone Software is a leading provider 
of enterprise knowledge management 
and knowledge sharing software. Our 
platform, TeamHub, is the foundation of our products and provides organizations 
with the tools they need to build, 
manage, and grow online knowledge sharing communities. 
For more information, please contact  
919-238-7100 or info@dzonesoftware.com. 
Learn faster and 
succeed with shared 
knowledge.
DZONESOFTWARE.COM
(919) 238 7100
INFO@DZONESOFTWARE.COM
