See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/269540203
Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation
Article    in  Journal of Inf ormation Syst ems  · June 2013
DOI: 10.2308/ isys -50428
CITATIONS
8READS
86
2 author s:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
Process of Pr ocess Modeling  View pr oject
Recommendation-b ased Conc eptual Modelling and an Ont olog y Ev olution F rame work (CMOE+)  View pr oject
Frederik Gailly
Ghent Univ ersity
78 PUBLICA TIONS    564 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Guido Geerts
Univ ersity of Delaw are
33 PUBLICA TIONS    976 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Frederik Gailly  on 09 July 2015.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
JOURNAL OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS American Accounting Association
Vol. 27, No. 1 DOI: 10.2308/isys-50428
Spring 2013
pp. 79–104
Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation
Frederik Gailly
Ghent University
Guido L. Geerts
University of Delaware
ABSTRACT: Discovering business rules is a complex task for which many approaches
have been proposed including analysis, extraction from code, and data mining. In this
paper, a novel approach is presented in which business rules for an enterprise model are
generated based on the semantics of a domain ontology. Starting from an enterprise
model for which the business rules need to be defined, the approach consists of foursteps: (1) classification of the enterprise model in terms of the domain ontology
(semantic annotation), (2) matching of the enterprise model constructs with ontology-
based Enterprise Model Configurations (EMCs), (3) determination of Business RulePatterns (BRPs) associated with the EMCs, and (4) use of the semantic annotations to
instantiate the business rule patterns; that is, to specify the actual business rules. The
success of this approach depends on two factors: (1) the existence of a semantically richdomain ontology, and (2) the strength of the knowledge base consisting of EMC-BRP
associations. The focus of this paper is on defining and illustrating the new business rule
discovery approach: Ontology-Driven Business Rule Specification (ODBRS). Thedomain of interest is enterprise systems, and an extended version of the Resource-
Event-Agent Enterprise Ontology (REA-EO) is used as the domain ontology. A small set
of EMC-BRP associations—i.e., an example knowledge base—is developed for
illustration purposes. The new approach is demonstrated with an example.
Keywords: business rule discovery and speciﬁcation; enterprise ontologies; REA-EO.
I. INTRODUCTION
Business rules are an integral part of enterprise systems and are deﬁned by the Business
Rules Group (2000, 4) as ‘‘statements that deﬁne or constrain some aspect of the
business. ’’Integrating business rules in enterprise systems encompasses a wide range of
activities including discovery, speciﬁcation, and implementation. The focus in this article is on
discovery and speciﬁcation, tasks that are typically executed by business professionals, not ITprofessionals. Several business rule discovery methods have been proposed throughout the years,including (1) discovery methods originate in requirements engineering (Von Halle 2002; Kardasis
The authors acknowledge the helpful comments of Julie Smith David, the editor, two anonymous reviewers, and the
participants of the 6th International Workshop on Value Modeling and Business Ontology.
Editor’s note: Accepted by Miklos A. Vasarhelyi.
Published Online: February 2013
79
and Loucopoulos 2004), (2) extraction of business rules from existing code (Wang et al. 2004), (3)
data mining (Rosca et al. 2002), and (4) model-driven discovery methods (Bajec and Krisper 2005;
Xue and Feng 2006). None of these methods can discover all business rules, and their combined
use is recommended (Xue and Feng 2006). In this paper, a novel approach for discovering and
specifying business rules is presented: Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation (ODBRS).
This approach complements the existing methods, and its application should result in a morecomplete set of business rules. The domain orientation should also make it easy for business
professionals to understand.
An ontology is an ‘‘explicit speciﬁcation of a shared conceptualization ’’(Gruber 1993, 199).
Common applications of ontologies include support of communication, software development, and
systems integration (Gruninger and Lee 2002). The use of enterprise ontologies, a conceptualspeciﬁcation that shows the ‘‘essence of the operation of an enterprise ’’(Dietz 2006, 8), has been
discussed at length in McCarthy (1982), Fox (1992), Uschold et al. (1998), Geerts and McCarthy(2000), Gordijn and Akkermans (2001), Dietz (2006), and Hruby et al. (2006). Although any
enterprise ontology could have been considered for the approach presented in this paper, the
Resource-Event-Agent Enterprise Ontology (REA-EO) (McCarthy 1982; Geerts and McCarthy
2000; Hruby et al. 2006) was chosen for the following three reasons: (1) the authors’ familiaritywith the REA-EO, (2) it is the dominant enterprise ontology in the Accounting Information Systems
(AIS) literature, and (3) it has been formally deﬁned, which facilitates semi-automatic discovery
and speciﬁcation of business rules (Gailly et al. 2008). Work by McCarthy (1982), Geerts andMcCarthy (2000), Hruby et al. (2006), and Dunn (2012) is referred to for a more in-depth
discussion of the REA-EO.
The research contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows. The REA-EO is a
domain ontology that can be used to express a wide range of enterprise phenomena (Hruby et al.2006). The novel idea is that REA-EO Enterprise Model Conﬁgurations (EMCs)—i.e.,
stereotypical patterns of economic phenomena deﬁned in terms of the REA-EO—imply businessrules. Identifying Business Rule Patterns (BRPs) and deﬁning them in terms of EMCs represents
the ODBRS discovery process and is a knowledge-creating activity. Once identiﬁed, BRPs can then
be used for generating business rule speciﬁcations (BRs) as part of actual enterprise models. Aunique characteristic of ontology-based BRPs is that they are applicable across business processes
and business organizations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the paper’s
contribution from a design science perspective. Section III presents the proposed business rule
discovery and speciﬁcation approach. Sections IV and V discuss the two supporting artifacts: theextended REA-EO vocabulary and the knowledge speciﬁcations. Section VI demonstrates ODBRS.
A set of business rules (output) is generated starting from an example enterprise model (input). The
paper ends with conclusions and further research directions.
II. RESEARCH METHOD
Following the Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) (Peffers et al. 2008; Geerts
2011), the research contribution of this paper is now deﬁned more formally. The ﬁrst step in theDSRM requests identiﬁcation of the problem and motivation for the research. An in-depth literaturereview indicates that discovering and specifying business rules are challenging tasks (Von Halle
2002; Xue and Feng 2006), and different approaches have been proposed throughout the years
including analysis, extraction from code, data mining, and model-driven discovery. Given thecomplexity of the task, these methods are complementary and current practice could beneﬁt from
improving existing approaches or from adding new ones.80 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
The second step in the DSRM requests the deﬁnition of the objectives of a solution. The overall
objective is to effectively determine relevant business rules. A unique objective for the approach
presented in this paper is to discover, specify, and rely on BRPs that can be applied across businessprocesses and business organizations. Further, the BRPs provide a vehicle that enables bestpractices to be applied to business rule speciﬁcation.
The third step in the DSRM focuses on the actual design of the artifact. The main artifact
presented in this paper is ODBRS as a novel approach to discovering and specifying business rules
in which business rules are derived from ontological speciﬁcations. This is a method in terms of theframework presented by March and Smith (1995, 257): ‘‘a set of steps used to perform a task. ’’Two
supporting artifacts are an integral part of the operationalization of ODBRS. The ﬁrst supportingartifact is an extended REA-EO vocabulary for deﬁning semantic annotations, EMCs, and BRPs.Extensions required for ODBRS include association ends and role declarations. The second
supporting artifact is the ODBRS knowledge base consisting of EMCs, BRPs, and the associations
between them. Although an in-depth discussion of the design of such a knowledge base is beyondthe scope of this paper, a small set of knowledge speciﬁcations will be created for illustrationpurposes.
The fourth step of the DSRM requests a demonstration of the novel artifact. ODBRS is
demonstrated by applying its steps to an example enterprise model (input). The result is a set offully integrated business rule speciﬁcations (output).
The ﬁfth step of the DSRM focuses on evaluation: ‘‘Observe and measure how well the artifact
supports a solution to the problem ’’(Peffers et al. 2008, 56). Important measures for the ODBRS
include its efﬁcacy and the relevance of the business rules generated. Moreover, whether theproposed method complements other approaches, i.e., whether it results in a more complete set of
business rules, should be evaluated. As pointed out by Vaishnavi and Kuechler (2007) and Geerts
(2011), evaluating an artifact requires a different skill set, and this part is left for future research.
III. ONTOLOGY-DRIVEN BUSINESS RULE SPECIFICATION
The focus of this paper is on ODBRS as an alternative approach for discovering and specifying
business rules. Figure 1 portrays the four steps in ODBRS, and each one is brieﬂy discussed.
(1) Classiﬁcation: Semantic annotations are used to classify the economic phenomena in the
enterprise model in terms of the REA-EO.
(2) Matching: Using the REA-EO semantic annotations, the constructs in the enterprise model
are matched against the EMCs with the latter representing stereotypical, ontology-based
deﬁnitions of economic phenomena.
(3) Association: The BRPs associated with the matching EMCs (Step 2) are identiﬁed.
(4) Instantiation: Business rule speciﬁcations are generated from the BRPs by replacing the
ontological terms in the BRPs—which act as variables—with enterprise model elements.
Figure 1 not only portrays the four steps of ODBRS, but also illustrates the following. First, the
business rule speciﬁcations depend on structural speciﬁcations (Ross 2003), and this dependency is
illustrated in Figure 1 by the associations between ‘‘Business Rules ’’(left side) and ‘‘Structure ’’
(right side). BRPs are deﬁned in terms of EMCs while BRs are deﬁned in terms of enterprise model
constructs. Second, in Figure 1 the actual business rule speciﬁcations integrated with the enterprise
model (upper part) are clearly separated from the knowledge base speciﬁcations that are used togenerate the business rule speciﬁcations (lower part). The knowledge base consists of EMCs, BRPs,and the associations between them. Third, in Figure 1 the importance of the enterprise ontology isemphasized as a vocabulary for deﬁning the semantic annotations, EMCs, and BRPs.Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 81
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

Although the focus of this paper is on ODBRS as an alternative business rule discovery and
speciﬁcation approach, the design of two supporting artifacts also needs to be discussed: (1) the
extended REA-EO vocabulary that enables the knowledge speciﬁcations, and (2) the knowledge
base itself, which is portrayed in the lower part of Figure 1.
IV. REA-EO VOCABULARY FOR ODBRS
As shown in Figure 1, the enterprise ontology—i.e., the REA-EO—is used as a vocabulary for
deﬁning semantic annotations, EMCs, and BRPs. The deﬁnition of REA-EO based BRPs requires a
vocabulary1that consists of the following four elements: (1) REA-EO object primitives, (2)
REA-EO association primitives, (3) REA-EO association ends, and (4) REA-EO role declarations.Association ends and role declarations are typically not considered an integral part of the REA-EOvocabulary, and their role in ODBRS needs more explanation.
Association ends are instrumental for path navigation in the context of business rule
speciﬁcation. Therefore, association end deﬁnitions are considered for all REA-EO associationprimitives. Each association end is given a unique name. Role declarations assign a stereotypical,
domain-speciﬁc role to attributes (Geerts and McCarthy 2006) and are important for generalizingFIGURE 1
The ODBRS Approach
1All elements of the REA-EO vocabulary are presented in camel case notation.82 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
business rule speciﬁcations that rely on attribute values. Role declarations can be part of a class or
an association class (Geerts and McCarthy 2006).
Table 1 shows the REA-EO vocabulary used in this paper. The ﬁrst column lists the
ontological primitives (i.e., the vocabulary), the second column deﬁnes each one, and the third
column provides the source of the deﬁnition. New ontological primitives created for ODBRS are
indicated by ‘‘This paper ’’in the third column.
The vocabulary in Table 1 is a subset and an extension of the REA-EO vocabulary presented
by McCarthy (1982), Geerts and McCarthy (2000), Hruby et al. (2006), and the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO 2006). To keep things simple, the vocabulary is limited to
the subset of the REA-EO vocabulary needed to illustrate ODBRS in this paper. For example,
REA-EO primitives such as linkage, description, and grouping are not included. All extensions are
association ends and role declarations with the exception of the Involvement and Return associationprimitives. The Speciﬁcation association primitive deﬁnes the types of economic resources
involved in a commitment (ISO 2006). To our knowledge, a similar association that deﬁnes the
types of economic resources involved in an economic event is missing from the REA-EO. As
shown in Table 1, the Involvement association primitive is added to the REA-EO vocabulary to
address this issue. Return is a speciﬁc type of StockFlow association describing the reversing of a
previous StockFlow and has its own behavior and constraints.
V. ODBRS KNOWLEDGE BASE
As indicated in Figure 1, the ODBRS knowledge base consists of EMCs, BRPs, and the
associations between them. To illustrate the role of the knowledge base as part of ODBRS in the
‘‘ODBRS Demonstration ’’section, a small set of knowledge speciﬁcations is developed in this
section. The discussion starts from the BRPs, and the following are addressed for each one: (1) theconstraint being supported, (2) the EMCs to which the BRP applies, and (3) a formal deﬁnition of
the corresponding Business Rule Pattern Speciﬁcations (BRPSs).
The notation used for the representations of the EMCs is the Uniﬁed Modeling Language
(UML) (Object Management Group 2007). More speciﬁcally, the following UML class diagram
elements are used: class, association, association class, association end, attribute, and multiplicities.
To keep things simple, other modeling constructs such as subtyping are ignored. UML was chosen
because of its widespread use and the fact that UML provides mechanisms to graphically illustrate
ODBRS such as stereotypes. Other conceptual modeling grammars such as Object Role Modeling
(ORM) could have been used as well. BRPSs are deﬁned as Object Constraint Language (OCL)
invariants (Warmer and Kleppe 2003). OCL was chosen because of its widespread use, but other
business rules representation languages such as Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business
Rules (SBVR) could have been used as well. The developed BRPSs must be interpreted at the
instance level; that is, the actual business rules generated from the BRPSs are used to validateinstances of an enterprise model.
Business Rule Pattern 1 (BRP1)
2
Commitments Should Not Be Preceded by Their Fulﬁllment Economic Events
An REA-EO fulﬁllment association is sequential and implies the following constraint: ‘‘when a
commitment and an economic event are associated through a fulﬁllment association then the
economic event should not precede the commitment. ’’This is different from saying that a
2The relevance of the BRP, BRPS, and EMC numbers is limited to this paper.Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 83
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

TABLE 1
REA-EO Vocabulary
Ontological Primitives Deﬁnition Source
Object Primitives
Commitment Agreement to execute an economic
event in a well-deﬁned future that will
result in an increase in resources or a
decrease in resources.Ijiri 1975; Geerts and
McCarthy 2000
EconomicAgent Persons and agencies who participate in
(outside) and are accountable for
(inside) the economic events andcommitments of the enterprise.McCarthy 1982; Geerts
and McCarthy 2000
EconomicEvent A class of phenomena that reﬂects
changes in scarce means (economicresources) resulting from production,
exchange, consumption, and
distribution.Yu 1976; McCarthy 1982
EconomicResource Objects that (1) are scarce and have
utility, and (2) are under the controlof an enterprise.Ijiri 1975; McCarthy
1982
EconomicResourceType Describes types of economic resources. Geerts and McCarthy
2006
Association Primitives
Duality An association between an economic
event that results in an increase in theresource set of the enterprise and acorresponding economic event that
results in a decrease.Ijiri 1975; McCarthy
1982
Fulﬁllment An association between a commitment
and an economic event describing
how the economic event fulﬁlls the
commitment.Geerts and McCarthy
2000
Involvement An association between an economic
resource type and an economic eventdescribing the increment
aor
decrement in the economic resource
type.This paper
Participation An association between an economic
event and the outside economic agent
involved in the economic event.McCarthy 1982; Geerts
and McCarthy 2000
Reservation An association between an individually
traced economic resource and a
commitment describing the agreed-upon inﬂow or outﬂow of theeconomic resource.Geerts and McCarthy
2000
(continued on next page)84 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
TABLE 1 (continued)
Ontological Primitives Deﬁnition Source
Return An association between an individually
traced economic resource and an
economic event describing a reversestockﬂow: an inﬂow reversing a
previous outﬂow or an outﬂow
reversing a previous inﬂow.This paper
Speciﬁcation An association between an economic
resource type and a commitment
describing the agreed-upon incrementor decrement in the economicresource type.ISO 2006
StockFlow An association between an individually
traced economic resource and an
economic event describing the inﬂow
or outﬂow of the economic resourceas a result of the economic event.McCarthy 1982
Typiﬁcation An association linking instances of an
object class (e.g., individually tracedeconomic resources) to concepts (e.g.,
economic resource types) of which
they are concrete realizations.Geerts and McCarthy
2006
Association Ends
b
DualityEconomicEventIn/OutcRefers to an inﬂow/outﬂow economic
event that is the dual of an outﬂow/
inﬂow economic event as described
by the duality association.This paper
FulﬁllmentCommitment Refers to a commitment being fulﬁlled
by an economic event as described by
the fulﬁllment association.This paper
FulﬁllmentEconomicEvent Refers to an economic event fulﬁlling a
commitment as described by the
fulﬁllment association.This paper
InvolvementInc/DecEconomicEvent Refers to an economic event that results
in an increment/decrement of aneconomic resource type as described
by the involvement association.This paper
ParticipationEconomicAgent Refers to the involvement of an
(outside) economic agent in an
economic event as described by theparticipation association.This paper
ReservationEconomicResource Refers to an economic resource
committed to as described by thereservation association.This paper
ReturnIn/OutEconomicEvent Refers to an economic event that results
in a reverse inﬂow/outﬂow of aneconomic resource as described by
the return association.This paper
(continued on next page)Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 85
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

commitment can occur without an economic event or that an economic event can occur without a
commitment; both are business rules that can be expressed with multiplicities.
The EMC for BRP1 is shown in Figure 2. An EMC represents a unique combination of
domain-speciﬁc elements, in this particular case, a fulﬁllment association between a commitment
and an economic event combined with two Time role declarations. A fulﬁllment association withoutthe Time role declarations would be considered a different EMC.
FIGURE 2
EMC1TABLE 1 (continued)
Ontological Primitives Deﬁnition Source
SpeciﬁcationEconomicResourceType Refers to an economic resource type
committed to as described by the
speciﬁcation association.This paper
StockFlowIn/OutEconomicEvent Refers to an economic event that results
in an inﬂow/outﬂow of an economic
resource as described by the
stockﬂow association.This paper
StockFlowEconomicResource Refers to an economic resource affected
by an economic event as described by
the stockﬂow association.This paper
TypiﬁcationEconomicResourceType Refers to an economic resource type that
applies to a speciﬁc economic
resource as described by thetypiﬁcation association.This paper
Role Declarations
Price The amount of money given or set as
consideration for the exchange of a
resource.This paper
Quantity Number of resources in storage,
committed to, or exchanged.This paper
Time The speciﬁc point in time at which
either a commitment is being made oran economic event occurs.This paper
aWe use inﬂow/outﬂow for individually traced resources and increment/decrement for resource types.
bOnly the association ends needed for navigation in the BRP deﬁnitions discussed in the ‘‘ODBRS Knowledge Base ’’
section are included.
cTo save space, inﬂow(In)/increment(Inc) and outﬂow(Out)/decrement(Dec) association ends are described in one entry.86 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
BRPS1—i.e., the formal speciﬁcation of BRP1—is shown in Table 2. The syntax used is a
combination of OCL and the REA-EO vocabulary. The latter represents the variables that need to
be substituted by actual enterprise model elements when ontology-driven business rule
speciﬁcations are generated. Commitment is an object primitive, FulﬁllmentEconomicEvent is an
association end, and Time is a role declaration. Regarding economic events, Time refers to the time
of occurrence; regarding commitments, Time refers to when the commitment is being made.
Multiplicities are not relevant for EMC1 since the BRPS assumes the more general case that a
commitment can be fulﬁlled by multiple economic events.
Business Rule Pattern 2 (BRP2)
No Future Economic Events Are Recorded
This rule implies that all economic events are recorded when they occur or after they have
occurred. Similar to BRP1, an attribute with role declaration Time records the time of occurrence, for
example, when the shipment of goods occurs. The EMC for BRP2 consists of the Economic Event
class with a Time role declaration and is shown graphically in Figure 3. The formal speciﬁcation of
BRP2 (i.e., BRPS2) is represented in Table 3. This BRP shows how a constraint can be speciﬁed for arole declaration that applies across business processes and business organizations.
Business Rule Pattern 3 (BRP3)
Prices Have a Positive Numeric Value
This rule states that all attributes with a Price role declaration should have a positive numeric
value. This is similar to a sign check (Romney and Steinbart 2012) applied to a role declaration as
opposed to a speciﬁc attribute. This BRP is different from the two previous ones since it appliesTABLE 2
BPRS1
FIGURE 3
EMC2Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 87
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

to many different REA-EO object and associatio n primitives: EconomicResource (object),
EconomicResourceType (object), Speciﬁcation (a ssociation), and Involvement (association).
Thus, this is a case in which a BRP applies to sev eral EMCs (see Figure 4) and, therefore, there
are several BRPSs for the same BRP. Formal speciﬁcations for all four BRPSs are shown in
Table 4.TABLE 3
BRPS2
FIGURE 4
EMC3, EMC4, EMC5, and EMC688 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
Business Rule Pattern 4 (BRP4)
Only Existing Resources Can Participate in an Outﬂow/Decrement Economic Event
There is a sequential relationship between REA-EO inﬂow/increment economic events and
outﬂow/decrement economic events. Although resources can be considered at any time, they can be
given up (outﬂow/decrement) only if they are available. Figure 5 shows that BRP4 applies to two
different EMCs. EMC7, portrayed in the upper panel of Figure 5, reﬂects the situation in which theresources are individually traced. Following McCarthy (1982), the Economic Resource–Economic
Event associations are labeled as being of REA-EO type StockFlow. Association ends are used to
differentiate between inﬂows and outﬂows: StockFlowInEconomicEvent and StockFlowOutEco-nomicEvent.
EMC8, portrayed in the lower panel of Figure 5, reﬂects the situation in which information is
recorded for resource types only; that is, information regarding the physical transfer of the resourcesis summarized. Following the deﬁnitions in Table 1, the EMC8 associations are labeled as being of
REA-EO type Involvement and are further differentiated as either increments (inc) or decrements
(dec). BRPS40 and BRPS41 are speciﬁed in Table 5.
Business Rule Pattern 5 (BRP5)
Economic Resources Transferred Match the Economic Resources Committed To
Again, there are two different EMCs to which BRP5 applies, and they are presented in Figure
6. EMC9 represents the situation in which a speciﬁc, uniquely identiﬁed item is committed to. AsTABLE 4
BRPS30, BRPS31, BRPS32, and BRPS33Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 89
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

shown in the upper panel of Figure 6, this situation is expressed in REA-EO with a reservation
association. An important validation rule for the scenario deﬁned by EMC9 is whether the resource
being transferred is the resource committed to. Given that BRP5 holds for inﬂows and outﬂows, theReservationEconomicResource and StockFlowEconomicResource association ends are usedwithout further differentiation.
EMC10 represents the situation in which a type is committed to. As shown in the lower panel
of Figure 6, this situation is expressed in REA-EO with a speciﬁcation association. An importantvalidation rule for the scenario deﬁned by EMC10 is whether the resource being transferred is of thetype committed to. The two BRPSs are speciﬁed in Table 6.FIGURE 5
EMC7 and EMC8
TABLE 5
BRPS40 and BRPS4190 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
Business Rule Pattern 6 (BRP6)
The Number of Items Transferred Should Not Exceed the Number of Items Committed To
An important characteristic of BRP6 is that multiplicities determine the speciﬁcations. Among
others, this increases the number of different EMCs to deal with. Two of the possible EMCs are
discussed. The ﬁrst one, EMC11, is represented in the upper panel of Figure 7 and is similar to EMC9
but with speciﬁc multiplicity patterns added. The second one, EMC12, is represented in the lowerpanel of Figure 7 and is similar to EMC10 but, again, with speciﬁc multiplicity patterns added.
EMC11 portrays a scenario in which (1) a commitment is fulﬁlled by one economic event and
an economic event fulﬁlls one commitment only, and (2) economic resources are individuallytraced. An underscore indicates that the value of the multiplicity is irrelevant for the business rule
speciﬁcation. Given that there is only one economic event for a commitment, in this scenario, the
number of items transferred should be equal to the number of items committed to. Table 7 shows
how this constraint (BRPS60) can be formally deﬁned using OCL.
EMC12 portrays a more complex scenario that deals with (1) commitments deﬁned in terms of
resource types—indicated by the REA-EO Speciﬁcation association, (2) a role declaration—
Quantity—speciﬁed as part of the Speciﬁcation association class, and (3) partial fulﬁllments as
deﬁned by the multiplicities for the Fulﬁllment association. An important business rule to be
supported for this scenario is that the total number of resources of a speciﬁc type transferred cannotFIGURE 6
EMC9 and EMC10Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 91
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

exceed the number of committed resources for that type. The formal deﬁnition for this constraint is
speciﬁed as BRPS61 in Table 7.
Business Rule Pattern 7 (BRP7)
Only Resources That Have Been Transferred Can Be Returned
EMC13 in Figure 8 represents the stereotypical pattern for incoming returns for individually
traced economic resources: a duality association connects a Return-inﬂow and a StockFlow-outﬂowin which the same economic resource is involved. Although the return nature of the inﬂow
association in EMC13 is implied, the semantics are made more explicit by creating a Return
association primitive. The additional semantics also improve the understanding of the formal
speciﬁcation of BRP7, which is shown in Table 8.
Business Rule Pattern 8 (BRP8)
A Resource Can Be Returned (Inﬂow) Only by the Agent to Whom the Resource Was
Transferred (Outﬂow)
EMC14 in Figure 9 extends EMC13 with the economic agents involved in the returns. Now the
constraint speciﬁes that an economic resource should be returned by the agent to whom the resource
was transferred. Although multiplicities are not modeled in Figure 9, a more general case is assumedin which more than one (outside) economic agent can be involved in the same economic event. The
rule then becomes that the agents returning the economic resource should be a subset of the agents to
whom the resource was transferred. Table 9 formally deﬁnes this constraint using OCL.
VI. ODBRS DEMONSTRATION
In this section, ODBRS is demonstrated as an alternative business rule discovery method by
applying the BRPSs deﬁned to an actual enterprise model. In terms of design science research, theTABLE 6
BRPS50 and BRPS5192 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
discussion weaves design and demonstration. First, the role of enterprise models in ODBRS is
explained. Following, each of the four steps indicated in Figure 1 are discussed in more detail:
classiﬁcation, matching, association, and instantiation.
Enterprise Models
An enterprise model is a conceptual speciﬁcation that describes how a speciﬁc business entity
operates and creates value. Business rules and enterprise models are strongly intertwined: ‘‘rules
always build on facts and facts always build on terms ’’(Ross 2003, 270). ODBRS assumes that
business rules are generated starting from an enterprise model that has already been deﬁned. Figure
10 shows the enterprise model used as input for the example.3,4This model represents part of a
revenue cycle, but the Delivery economic event is included to illustrate BRP4.
Figure 11 visually portrays the ODBRS process step-by-step starting from a speciﬁc Enterprise
Model Fragment (EMF). An EMF is any possible instantiation of a modeling grammar rangingFIGURE 7
EMC11 and EMC12
3To save space, the REA-EO semantic annotations are alr eady included. They should be ignored at this point.
4In Figure 10, all inﬂows, outﬂows, inc rements, and decrements are explicitly deﬁned, even when the applicable
rules, deﬁned in the ‘‘ODBRS Knowledge Base ’’section, do not require such differentiation (e.g., BRPS51).Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 93
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

from a single construct—e.g., an entity such as Shipment—to the complete enterprise model.
Obviously, the number of EMFs, even for a simple enterprise model such as the one in Figure 10, ishigh. More speciﬁcally, Figure 11 demonstrates how the business rule in Panel E (BR1) isgenerated from the EMF in Panel A by the application of ODBRS. A visual approach was chosensince it fully exposes the details of the ODBRS process.TABLE 7
BRPS60 and BRPS61
FIGURE 8
EMC1394 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
Classiﬁcation
Semantic annotations have become increasingly popular with the emergence of the ‘‘Semantic
Web ’’(Berners-Lee et al. 2001). They give meaning to data and have been used in a wide variety of
applications, including interchange (Park and Ram 2004; Vujasinovic et al. 2010; Cardoso and
Bussler 2011) and reasoning (Sedbrook and Newmark 2008). In the AIS area, the use of semantic
annotations is widespread. The prototypical example of semantically enriched accounting data isthe eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL), which has been used for a wide range of
applications (Bovee et al. 2005; Debreceny et al. 2009). In addition, numerous studies illustrate
how to employ REA-EO semantic annotations for validation and information retrieval applications(Geerts 1993; Rockwell and McCarthy 1999; Geerts and McCarthy 2000). This is known as
augmented intentional reasoning: ‘‘active use of conceptual structures augmented with the domain-
speciﬁc REA structures imposed on top of the enterprise schema ’’(Geerts and McCarthy 2000,
128). This technique is also used in this paper.
For ODBRS, the semantic annotations give domain-speciﬁc meaning to an enterprise model.
As shown in Panel B in Figure 11, UML stereotypes are used for adding semantic annotations: For
example, Shipment is classiﬁed as an Economic Event, Order is classiﬁed as a Commitment, the
association between the two is classiﬁed as an instantiation of the REA-EO Fulﬁllment primitive,TABLE 8
BRPS7
FIGURE 9
EMC14Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 95
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

the shipment association end is classiﬁed as an instance of FulﬁllmentEconomicEvent, and a Time
role declaration is assigned to both date attributes.
Figure 10 shows all semantic annotations for the example enterprise model, and they should be
considered the result of the ﬁrst step of ODBRS: classiﬁcation. Obviously, the classiﬁcation process
should be subject to validation. For example, a duality association should always be betweenTABLE 9
BRPS8
FIGURE 10
Enterprise Model96 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
economic events with opposite ﬂows. Many studies have explored automated validation based on
the explicit representation of REA-EO semantics, including work by Geerts (1993), Geerts et al.(1996), and Rockwell and McCarthy (1999).
Matching
During this step, EMFs are matched against EMCs. In Figure 11, the REA-EO annotated EMF
in Panel B matches with—and thus is an instance of—the EMC represented in Panel C. In Figure
12, ten EMFs are identiﬁed for the example enterprise model, and each one is linked to thematching EMC in Table 10.
Next, two characteristics of the matching process are discussed in more detail. First, not all
EMCs discussed occur in the third column of Table 10. Among others, this is because differentpractices and, thus, EMCs can be associated with the same situation, e.g., EMC7 (individually
traced) versus EMC8 (recording of type-level resources).
Second, Figure 13 deﬁnes a meta-model for the different ODBRS concepts: EMF, EMC, BRP,
BRPS, and BR. Table 10 illustrates the ‘‘matches ’’association in the meta-model. There can be
more than one EMF for an EMC. For example, EMC2 applies to all three Economic Events in the
enterprise model in Figure 12 and, thus, to three EMFs: EMF2, EMF3, and EMF4. However, atmost one EMC can apply to an EMF.FIGURE 11
Visual Illustration of ODBRSOntology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 97
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

Although visual matching helps with illustrating the ODBRS matching process, visual
matching is feasible for very small examples only. Real-world matching would require help from
automated tools. A prerequisite for automated support is the explicit representation of the semantic
annotations and the semantics of the EMCs. The use of Prolog for such explicit representation andreasoning is discussed in Geerts (1993) and Geerts and McCarthy (2000). More recently, theintroduction of semantic web technologies has further improved the possibilities of representing and
reasoning with such annotations.
Association
Several associations between EMCs and BRPs were discussed in the ‘‘ODBRS Knowledge
Base ’’section, and their use as part of ODBRS is elaborated here. Panel D of Figure 11 shows that
BRPS1 (and thus BRP1) is associated with EMC1 and deﬁned in terms of its vocabulary:
Commitment, FulﬁllmentEconomicEvent, and Time.
The association step represents a process that links BRPs with EMCs. The meta-model in
Figure 13 more formally deﬁnes this link—i.e., the ‘‘associated-with ’’association. For ODBRS,
only EMCs for which at least one BRP exists are relevant. Obviously, there can be more than one
BRP for the same EMC. For example, several date-related constraints could be deﬁned for EMC2.Further, there can be more than one EMC for the same BRP as illustrated by BRP4, which applies
to EMC7 and EMC8. A BRPS—shown as an association class in Figure 13—formally deﬁnes theFIGURE 12
Enterprise Model with EMF Deﬁnitions98 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
application of a BRP to a speciﬁc EMC. Table 11 summarizes all BRPSs that were developed as
part of the example knowledge base in the ‘‘ODBRS Knowledge Base ’’section and illustrates the
‘‘associated-with ’’association. The BRPSs that apply to the enterprise model in Figure 10 are
italicized.
Instantiation
During the ODBRS instantiation process, the actual business rules associated with the
enterprise model are generated. Here, the REA-EO primitives that function as variables in the
BRPSs are substituted by actual elements from the enterprise model. The following substitutions
were made to generate the business rule speciﬁcation in Panel E of Figure 11: Commitment!Order; FulﬁllmentEconomicEvent.Time !shipment.date; Time !date. The ‘‘deﬁned in terms
of’’association in Figure 11 further indicates that the speciﬁed business rule is fully integrated with
the enterprise model used as input for the example (Panel A).
As shown by the meta-model in Figure 13, a BRPS can generate many business rules, but each
business rule is an instantiation of exactly one BRPS. Table 12 lists all OCL business rule
speciﬁcations resulting from applying ODBRS to the enterprise model in Figure 10. Stateddifferently, this is the output generated by ODBRS when using the enterprise model in Figure 10 asinput. The ﬁrst column in Table 12 is used to indicate of which BRPS the business rule is an
instantiation.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This paper presents ODBRS as an alternative approach to discovering and specifying business
rules. Strengths of this approach include the following: (1) the ability to develop business rulespeciﬁcations based on formally deﬁned patterns that have been refactored and evaluated using testTABLE 10
EMF-EMC MatchingOntology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 99
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

cases (Correa and Werner 2007), and (2) the reuse of the business rule patterns across business
processes and business organizations. ODBRS complements other business rule discoveryapproaches such as analysis, extraction from code, and data mining. Having discussed thecharacteristics and mechanics of ODBRS, it is important to differentiate it from other researchprojects in the same area.
First, a clear distinction needs to be made between ontology-driven design rules and
ontology-driven business rules. The ﬁrst category represents rules that provide guidance in building
enterprise models. An example of such a rule in the context of the REA-EO is that for eacheconomic resource in an enterprise model, there must be at least one inﬂow association and at leastone outﬂow association. Business rules apply to instances of REA-EO primitives and are part of theactual software system.
Second, the ideas presented in this paper somewhat overlap with a series of papers that aim at
facilitating the development of OCL constraints (Costal et al. 2006; Ackermann and Turowski
2006), which is time consuming and error prone (Cabot et al. 2010; Wahler et al. 2010). For
instance, Ackermann and Turowski (2006) develop OCL speciﬁcation patterns that are used toautomatically generate OCL constraints that specify behavioral aspects of software components.The most important differen tiating characteristic of ODBRS is its strong reliance on
domain-speciﬁc knowledge.
The focus of this paper is on ODBRS as a method, and many issues that need further
exploration, including the following four, remain. First, a visual approach to ODBRS was chosen inthis paper. Although this approach helps with understanding the underlying process,FIGURE 13
ODBRS Meta-Model100 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
operationalization of ODBRS requires advanced automated support, including tool support for
deﬁning semantic annotations and reasoning capabilities during matching and instantiation.
Second, the strength of ODBRS depends on the expressivity of the domain-speciﬁc vocabulary
being used, and the depth and relevance of the knowledge base. In this paper, a limited number of
examples were presented for illustration purposes, and more in-depth research is required for both:a more advanced study of REA-EO’s vocabulary and the development of more advanced BRPs andBRPSs.
Third, as pointed out earlier in the paper, none of the methods can discover all rules, and this is
true for ODBRS as well. Thus, more research is needed that evaluates the complementarity of
ODBRS to other methods: How many new, relevant rules can be generated by this method? Moreresearch is also needed to fully understand other criteria that determine the success of ODBRS suchas complexity and cost. The development of a full-ﬂedged knowledge base would be a helpful toolfor evaluation purposes.
Fourth, the visual approach presented here might be helpful in an educational setting. Among
others, this approach requires students to classify an enterprise model in terms of the REA-EO, to
fully understand different EMCs and thus different business practices, to identify and analyzeTABLE 11
EMC-BRP AssociationsOntology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 101
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

TABLE 12
Business Rule Speciﬁcations102 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
business rule patterns that apply across business processes and business organizations, and to deﬁne
actual business rule speciﬁcations based on best practices.
REFERENCES
Ackermann, J., and K. Turowski. 2006. A library of OCL speciﬁcation patterns for behavioral speciﬁcation
of software components. In Advanced Information Systems Engineering (CAISE 2006) , edited by
Dubois, E., and K. Pohl, 225–269. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Bajec, M., and M. Krisper. 2005. A methodology and tool support for managing business rules in
organizations. Information Systems 30 (6): 423–443.
Berners-Lee, T., J. Hendler, and O. Lassila. 2001. The Semantic Web. Scientiﬁc American 284 (5): 34–43.
Bovee, M., A. Kogan, K. Nelson, R. P. Srivastava, and M. A. Vasarhelyi. 2005. Financial reporting and
auditing agent with net knowledge (FRAANK) and eXtensible Business Reporting Language
(XBRL). Journal of Information Systems 19 (1): 19–41.
Business Rules Group. 2000. Deﬁning business rules—What are they really? Available at: http://www.
businessrulesgroup.org/ﬁrst_paper/BRG-whatisBR_3ed.pdf
Cabot, J., R. Pau, and R. Raventos. 2010. From UML/OCL to SBVR speciﬁcations: A challenging
transformation. Information Systems 35 (4): 417–440.
Cardoso, J., and C. Bussler. 2011. Mapping between heterogeneous XML and OWL transaction
representations in B2B integration. Data & Knowledge Engineering 70 (12): 1046–1069.
Correa, A., and C. Werner. 2007. Refactoring object constraint language speciﬁcations. Software and
Systems Modeling 6 (2): 113–138.
Costal, D., C. Go ´mez, A. Queralt, R. Ravento ´s, and E. Teniente. 2006. Facilitating the deﬁnition of general
constraints in UML. In Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (Models 2006) , edited by
Nierstrasz, O., J. Whittle, D. Harel, and G. Reggio, 260–274. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Debreceny, R., C. Felden, B. Ochocki, and M. Piechocki. 2009. XBRL for Interactive Data: Engineering the
Information Value Chain . Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Dietz, J. L. G. 2006. Enterprise Ontology: Theory and Methodology . Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Dunn, C. L. 2012. REA Accounting Systems: Resources-Events-Agents: An Ontology for Designing,
Controlling, and Using Integrated Enterprise Systems . 4th ed. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Fox, M. S. 1992. The TOVE Project: A common-sense model of the enterprise. In Industrial and
Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Expert Systems , edited by Belli, F., and F.
Radermacher, 25–34. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Gailly, F., W. Laurier, and G. Poels. 2008. Positioning and formalizing the REA enterprise ontology.
Journal of Information Systems 22 (2): 219–248.
Geerts, G. 1993. Toward a New Paradigm in Structuring and Processing Accounting Data . Ph.D.
dissertation, Free University Brussels.
Geerts, G. 2011. A design science research methodology and its application to accounting information
systems research. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems 12 (2): 142–151.
Geerts, G., and W. E. McCarthy. 2000. Augmented intentional reasoning in knowledge-based accounting
systems. Journal of Information Systems 14 (2): 127.
Geerts, G., and W. E. McCarthy. 2006. Policy-level speciﬁcation in REA enterprise information systems.
Journal of Information Systems 20 (2): 37–63.
Geerts, G., W. E. McCarthy, and S. R. Rockwell. 1996. Automated integration of enterprise accounting
models throughout the systems development life cycle. International Journal of Intelligent Systems in
Accounting, Finance and Management 5 (3): 113–128.
Gordijn, J., and J. M. Akkermans. 2001. E3-value: Design and evaluation of e-business models. IEEE
Intelligent Systems 16 (4): 11–17.
Gruber, T. R. 1993. A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁcations. Knowledge Acquisition 5
(2): 199–220.Ontology-Driven Business Rule Speciﬁcation 103
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013

Gruninger, M., and J. Lee. 2002. Ontology applications and design: Introduction. Communications of the
ACM 45 (2): 39–41.
Hruby, P., J. Kiehn, and C. V. Scheller. 2006. Model-Driven Design Using Business Patterns . Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Ijiri, Y. 1975. Theory of Accounting Measurement . Sarasota, FL: American Accounting Association.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 2006. Information Technology—Business Operational
View—Part 4: Business Transaction Scenarios—Accounting and Economic Ontology . Geneva,
Switzerland: International Organization for Standardization.
Kardasis, P., and P. Loucopoulos. 2004. Expressing and organizing business rules. Information and
Software Technology 46 (11): 701–718.
March, S. T., and G. F. Smith. 1995. Design and natural science research on information technology.
Decision Support Systems 15 (4): 251–266.
McCarthy, W. E. 1982. The REA accounting model: A generalized framework for accounting systems in a
shared data environment. The Accounting Review 57: 554–578.
Object Management Group (OMG). 2007. Uniﬁed Modeling Language: Infrastructure, Version 2.1.2 .
Needham, MA: OMG.
Park, J., and S. Ram. 2004. Information systems interoperability: What lies beneath? ACM Transactions on
Information Systems 22 (4): 595–632.
Peffers, K., T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee. 2008. A design science research
methodology for information systems research. Journal of Management Information Systems 24 (3):
45–77.
Rockwell, S. R., and W. E. McCarthy. 1999. REACH: Automated database design integrating ﬁrst-order
theories, reconstructive expertise, and implementation heuristics for accounting information systems.
International Journal of Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Management 8 (3): 181–197.
Romney, M. B., and P. J. Steinbart. 2012. Accounting Information Systems . 12th ed. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Rosca, D., S. Greenspan, and C. Wild. 2002. Enterprise modeling and decision-support for automating the
business rules lifecycle. Automated Software Engineering 9 (4): 361–404.
Ross, R. G. 2003. Principles of the Business Rule Approach . Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Sedbrook, T., and R. I. Newmark. 2008. Automating REA policy level speciﬁcations with semantic web
technologies. Journal of Information Systems 22 (2): 249–277.
Uschold, M., M. King, S. Moralee, and Y. Zorgios. 1998. The enterprise ontology. The Knowledge
Engineering Review: Special Issue on Putting Ontologies to Use 13 (1): 31–89.
Vaishnavi, V. K., and W. J. Kuechler. 2007. Design Science Research Methods and Patterns: Innovating
Information and Communication Technology . New York, NY: Auerbach.
Von Halle, B. 2002. Business Rules Applied. Building Better Systems Using the Business Rules Approach .
New York, NY: Wiley & Sons.
Vujasinovic, M., N. Ivezic, B. Kulvatunyou, E. Barkmeyer, M. Missikoff, F. Taglino, Z. Marjanovic, and I.
Miletic. 2010. Semantic mediation for standard-based B2B interoperability. IEEE Internet
Computing 14 (1): 52–63.
Wahler, M., D. Basin, A. Brucker, and J. Koehler. 2010. Efﬁcient analysis of pattern-based constraint
speciﬁcations. Software and Systems Modeling 9 (2): 225–255.
Wang, X., J. Sun, X. Yang, Z. He, and S. Maddineni. 2004. Business Rules Extraction from Large Legacy
Systems . 249–258. Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on Software Maintenance and
Reengineering, Tampere, Finland.
Warmer, J., and A. Kleppe. 2003. The Object Constraint Language: Getting Your Models Ready for MDA .
2nd ed. Boston, MA: Pearson Education.
Xue, L., and B. Feng. 2006. A model-driven approach for business constraints discovery. Information
Technology Journal 5 (3): 454–459.
Yu, S. C. 1976. The Structure of Accounting Theory . Gainesville, FL: The University Presses of Florida.104 Gailly and Geerts
Journal of Information Systems
Spring 2013
View publication statsView publication stats
