Ontology-based multi-agent system to support business
users and management
Dejan Lavbič, Olegas Vasilecas and Rok Rupnik
DejanLavbič , OlegasVasilecasandRokRupnik. 2010. Ontology-basedmulti-agentsystem
to support business users and management , Technological and Economic Development of
Economy (TEDE) , 16(2), pp. 327 - 347.
Abstract
For some decision processes a signiﬁcant added value is achieved when enterprises’ internal Data Warehouse
(DW) can be integrated and combined with external data gained from web sites of competitors and other
relevant Web sources. In this paper we discuss the agent-based integration approach using ontologies (DSS-
MAS). In this approach data from internal DW and external sources are scanned by coordinated group of
agents, while semantically integrated and relevant data is reported to business users according to business
rules. After data from internal DW, Web sources and business rules are acquired, agents using these data
and rules can infer new knowledge and therefore facilitate decision making process. Knowledge represented
in enterprises’ ontologies is acquired from business users without extensive technical knowledge using user
friendly user interface based on constraints and predeﬁned templates. The approach presented in the paper
was veriﬁed using the case study from the domain of mobile communications with the emphasis on supply
and demand of mobile phones.
Keywords
Decision support, agent, multi-agent system, ontology, data warehouse, information retrieval, business rules,
business process management
1 Introduction
There is a growing recognition in the business community about the importance of knowledge as a critical
resource for enterprises. The purpose of knowledge management is to help enterprises create, derive, share
and use knowledge more eﬀectively to achieve better decisions, to increase of competitiveness and to decrease
the number of errors. In order to run business eﬀectively an enterprise needs more and more information
about competitors, partners, customers, and also employees as well as information about market conditions,
future trends, government policies and much more. There are several products and technologies available
on the market that support advanced Business Process Management (BPM) (Trkman et al., 2007) and
advanced decision support. Enterprises expect these applications to support wide range of functionalities -
analysing customer proﬁles, building and analysing business strategies, developing customer-speciﬁc products,
carrying out targeted marketing and predicting sales trends. Amount of documents in the Web, enterprise
data repositories, and public document management systems with documents are rapidly growing. This huge
amount of data is managed in some extent, but knowledge workers, managers, and executives still have to
spend much of their working time reading dozens of various types of electronic documents spread over several
sources in process of making decisions. There is just too much information to digest in a daily life. The
tremendous amount of documents that is still growing has far exceeded the human ability for comprehension
without intelligent tools. Diﬀerent applications within information systems (IS) that support wide range of
functionalities need to be integrated in order to provide the appropriate level of information support. One of
1arXiv:1807.03646v1  [cs.MA]  10 Jul 2018
the prominent approaches for IS integration is the use of ontologies and Multi-Agent Systems (Fuentes et al.,
2006; Soo et al., 2006; Dzemydiene and Tankeleviciene, 2009).
The approach presented in this paper is targeted towards using ontologies for several tasks, where emphasis is
on using business rules (BR) approach for interoperability between business user and IS. By introduction of
BR approach business users do not have to be fully familiar with the technology to manipulate the common
understanding of a problem domain in a form of ontology and therefore enabling agents to execute deﬁned
analyses models. The use of ontologies in Multi-Agent System (MAS) environment enables agents to share a
common set of concepts about contexts, user proﬁles, products and other domain elements while interacting
with each other. Agents can exploit the existing reasoning mechanisms to infer derived contexts from known
contexts, to make decisions and to adapt to the environment, current status, and personal setting of the
user. The purpose of this paper is to present the approach of integration of several information resources
for Decision Support in Enterprises using agent-oriented approach based on ontologies. The goal of our
research is to minimize the gap between business users and agents as special type of application systems that
perform tasks in their behalf. The intention was to apply BR approach for ontology manipulation in MAS.
Ontology used in our Multi-Agent System for Decision Support in Enterprises (DSS-MAS) was divided into
task and domain ontologies while business users were enabled to manipulate them directly in a user friendly
environment without requirement of detailed technical knowledge.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. First we present some background in the following
section 2 with emphasis on agents, ontologies and related work with clear deﬁnition of the problem and
solution proposal. Next, in section 3, we introduce our case study of integrated Multi-Agent environment from
the domain of mobile communications with emphasis on architecture and the roles of agents and ontologies.
The case study is focused in one of the mobile operators and furthermore oriented to supply and demand
of mobile phones. After presentation of system architecture and decomposition of ontology of every agent
from DSS-MAS will be presented in detail. Details of case study implementation will be given in section 4.3.
Finally the last section 5 presents conclusions.
2 Some background on decision support, multi-agent systems and
ontologies
Decision support systems (DSS) have evolved signiﬁcantly and there have been many inﬂuences from
technological and organizational developments (Shim et al., 2002). DSS once utilized more limited database,
modelling, and user interface functionality, but technological innovations enabled more powerful DSS function-
ality. DSS once supported individual decision makers, but later DSS technologies are applied to workgroups
or teams, especially virtual teams. The advent of the Web has enabled inter-organizational DSS and has given
rise to numerous new applications of existing technology as well as many new decision support technologies
themselves. Internet facilitates access to data, information and knowledge sources, but at the same time, it
threatens to cognitively overload the decision makers. Authors in (Vahidov and Kersten, 2004) claim that
internet technologies require a new type of decision support that provides tighter integration and higher
degree of direct interaction with the problem domain. Based on that they propose a generic architecture
for dynamic and highly complex electronic environments where DSS’s should be situated in the problem
domain. Chen et al. (2001) conducted an interesting research about integrated interactive environment for
knowledge discovery from heterogeneous data resources. Their work is grounded on acquiring, collecting, and
extracting relevant information from multiple data sources, and then forming meaningful knowledge patterns.
The proposed system employs common DW and OLAP1techniques to form integrated data repository and
generate database queries over large data collections from various distinct data resources.
Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) oﬀer a new dimension for cooperation and coordination in an enterprise.
The MAS paradigm provides a suitable architecture for a design and implementation of integrated IS,
especially DSS. With agent-based technology a support for complex IS development is introduced by natural
decomposition, abstraction and ﬂexibility of management for organisational structure changes (Kishore et al.,
1OnLine Analytical Processing (OLAP)
2
2006). The MAS consists of a collection of autonomous agents that have their own goals and actions and can
interact and collaborate through communication means. In a MAS environment, agents work collectively
to solve speciﬁc enterprises’ problems. MAS provide an eﬀective platform for coordination and cooperation
among multiple functional units in an enterprise. The research on agents and MAS has been on the rise over
the last two decades. The stream of research on IS and enterprise integration (Lei et al., 2002; Kang and Han,
2003; Tewari et al., 2003) makes the MAS paradigm appropriate platform for integrative decision support
within IS. Similarities between the agent in the MAS paradigm and the human actor in business organisations
in terms of their characteristics and coordination lead us to a conceptualisation where agents in MAS are
used to represent actors in human organizations. Several approaches (Tewari et al., 2003; Rivest et al., 2005;
Kishore et al., 2006; Soo et al., 2006) deal with agent support for integration and decision support. Research
in (Kishore et al., 2006) has shown that MAS paradigm provides an excellent approach for modelling and
implementing integrated business IS. Authors within that research proposed a conceptual framework for MAS
based integrative business IS. Some promising results were also found in (Soo et al., 2006), where authors
propose a cooperative MAS platform to support the invention process based on the patent document analysis.
The platform allows the invention process to be carried out through the cooperation and coordination among
software agents delegated by the various domain experts in the complex industrial R&D environment.
Today, semantic technologies based on ontologies and inference are considered as a promising means towards
the development of the Semantic Web (Davies et al., 2006). In the ﬁeld of Computer Science and Information
Technology (IT) in general ontology has become popular as a paradigm for knowledge representation in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), by providing a methodology for easier development of interoperable and reusable
knowledge bases (KB). The most popular deﬁnition, from an AI perspective, is given in (Gruber, 1993)
as follows: “An ontology is an explicit speciﬁcation of a conceptualization”, where a conceptualization is
abstracted view of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. Ontologies can be considered as
conceptual schemata, intended to represent knowledge in the most formal and reusable way possible. Formal
ontologies are represented in logical formalisms, such as OWL, which allow automatic inferencing over them.
An important role of ontologies is to serve as schemata or intelligent views over information resources. Thus
they can be used for indexing, querying, and reference purposes over non-ontological datasets and systems,
such as databases, document and catalogue management systems. Because ontological languages have a
formal semantics, ontologies allow a wider interpretation of data that is inference of facts which are not
explicitly stated. In this way, they can improve the interoperability of the conceptualization behind them,
their coverage of arbitrary datasets. Ontology can formally be deﬁned as speciﬁc sort of knowledge base and
can be characterized as comprising a 4-tuple (Davies et al., 2006)
O=/angbracketleftC, R, I, A/angbracketright (1)
Where Cis set of classes representing concepts we wish to reason about in the given domain ( Offer,
Finding,Phone,Customer , etc.). Ris set ofrelations holding between those classes ( Message hasRecipient
Actor). I is a set of instances , where each instance can be an instance of one or more classes and can
be linked to other instances by relations ( Nokia is A PhoneBrand ;Finding309 hasValue 11,23 ).Ais
a set ofaxioms(If a new customer buys is A Nokia E72, promotional discount of 10% should be
offered). It is widely recommended that knowledge bases, containing concrete data (instance data or ABox)
are always encoded with respect to ontologies, which encapsulate a general conceptual model of some domain
knowledge, thus allowing easier sharing and reuse of KBs. Typically, ontologies designed to serve as schema
for KBs do not contain instance deﬁnitions, but there is no formal restriction in this direction. Drawing the
borderline between the ontology (i.e. the conceptual and consensual part of the knowledge) and the rest of
the data, represented in the same formal language, is not always trivial task. In our approach we include
instances as part of ontologies because instances we deﬁne are a matter of conceptualization and consensus
and are not only descriptions, crafted for some purpose.
Related work on using ontologies in information systems for decision support is extensive. Regarding the
domain of DW and OLAP analyses research has dealt with Document Warehousing (Tseng and Chou, 2006)
where extensive semantic information about the documents is available but still not fully employed as in
traditional DW. The use of ontologies was found useful as a common interpretation basis for data and
metadata. Furthermore research has extended to Web DW (Marotta et al., 2002) with the emphasis on
3
managing the volatile and dynamic nature of Web sources. Utilization of ontologies is also addressed in
Information Retrieval (IR) where it has been used for fuzzy tagging of data from the Web (Buche et al.,
2006; Macias and Castells, 2007), query construction tool in semi-automatic ontology mapping (Suomela and
Kekalainen, 2006) and semantic based retrieval of information from the World Wide Web (Shan et al., 2003;
Garces et al., 2006). Use of ontologies in Data Mining (DM) has also been considered in (Bernaras et al., 1996;
Zhou et al., 2002; Singh et al., 2003; Cao et al., 2004) where ontology was used for representation of context
awareness and handling semantics inconsistencies. Ontologies have been widely used for data, application
and information integration in the context of domain knowledge representation (Qiu, 2006). Jovanović and
Gašević (2005) concludes that the need for knowledge sharing and interoperable KBs exists and the key
element for achieving interoperability are domain ontologies. In that approach XSLT2transformation is used
to enable knowledge interoperability. Authors in (Vasilecas and Bugaite, 2006) use ontologies for ontology
based IS development and they address the problem of automation of information processing rules. There
are also other approaches (Fuentes et al., 2006; Orgun and Vu, 2006; Clark and McCabe, 2007) that use
ontologies as knowledge representation mechanisms. Authors in (Clark and McCabe, 2007) use a formal
ontology as a constraining framework for the belief store of a rational agent. The static beliefs of the agent
are the axioms of the ontology, while dynamic beliefs are the descriptions of the individuals that are instances
of the ontology classes. Another work presented in (Fuentes et al., 2006) also uses heterogeneous domain
ontology for location based IS in a MAS framework with the emphasis on context-aware MAS. They propose
a global ontology to let agents work with heterogeneous domains using a wireless network and the intention
is to provide customization about diﬀerent environment services based on user location and proﬁle.
2.1 Problem and proposal for solution
The review of related work presented in this section pointed out that modern DSS’s changed quite substantially
especially with the advent of the Web and availability of extensive information in online repositories. For
managing complexity and integration issues with decision support many approaches relied on MAS paradigm
and used ontologies as knowledge representation mechanism. The existing approaches mainly focused on either
supporting existing business processes or improving decision support at some level of detail or integration of
several structured resources to achieve better decision support. To our knowledge none of the approaches
addressed the problem of enriching data from internal data sources with unstructured data found on internet.
The interactivity of reviewed solutions is also limited; meaning that business users are usually limited to
small set of parameters they can deﬁne to alter default behaviour of the system. These user requirements
are usually entered directly into the system and no abstraction layers are provided as in business rules
management systems (BRMS) to enable users without technical skills to manipulate the content.
This paper introduces a novel approach in integration of unstructured information found in the Web with
information available in several internal data sources (e.g. database, DW, ERP3, etc.). The MAS paradigm
with agents was used for implementation purposes, mainly because related work pointed out that it is a very
appropriate solution for integration of business IS. One of the reasons to choose agents is also modelling
notion where business users and agents are modelled in a very similar manner. Problem of interaction
between human actors and computer programs is also addressed by introduction of ontologies as knowledge
representation mechanism. The approach presented in this paper is targeted towards using ontologies for
several tasks, where emphasis is on using BR approach to ensure interoperability between business user and
IS. Ontology is used not only for every agent to represent the interpretation of a problem domain but also for
communication between agents and business users. The use of ontologies in MAS enables agents to share a
common set of facts used in user proﬁles, product descriptions and other domain elements, while interacting
with each other. With exploiting reasoning mechanisms new ﬁndings can be derived from initially known
facts and improve the KB by extending it with new knowledge. To simplify this communication template
system based on BR was introduced to enable manipulation of knowledge within the system by users with less
technical skills and to control behaviour of individual agent. The approach will be further explained in the
following section. The case study presented in this paper is from the domain of mobile telecommunications.
2XSLT (XSL Transformations) is a declarative, XML-based language used for the transformation of XML documents into
other XML documents
3Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
4
It is presented in detail (with the impact it has on improving decision support within enterprise) in section
4.3. In the domain of mobile communications that was used for case study we had to deﬁne several tasks in
DSS-MAS, needed for decision support - OLAP analyses, DM, IR, context and proﬁle deﬁnition, notiﬁcation,
etc.
3 DSS-MAS
3.1 DSS-MAS architecture
DSS-MAS that we propose in this paper is introduced in Figure 1. The case study presented in this paper
is from the domain of mobile telecommunications and is based on business environment and information
resources from one of the mobile operators. DSS-MAS is situated in the environment of several existing
systems, like Data Mining Decision Support System (DMDSS), or DW and various resources available outside
of an enterprise on the World Wide Web. Global goal that agents in DSS-MAS should achieve is to support
decision making process while using existing systems for business analysis and employing information from
environment where enterprise resides. To support this goal DSS-MAS includes several agent roles that are
as following: Data Mining Agent (DMA) ,OLAP Agent (OLAPA) ,Information Retrieval Agent
(IRA),Knowledge Discovery Agent (KDA) ,Notifying Agent (NA) andMobile Agent (MA) .
The agents in DSS-MAS have both reactive and proactive characteristics. Reactive are mainly due to
responding to the environment according to the model deﬁned in the KB they use. Proactive are due to
their ability to learn from the environment and change the initially deﬁned KB to for example improve
performance. Ontologies are used as a main interconnection object for domain knowledge representation,
agent-to-agent communication and most important for agent-to-business user communication. An important
element of an environment is the World Wide Web, where agents acquire information for the purpose of
decision making. Retrieved information is saved in a KB and available for further employment for DM and
DW analyses. All information gathered from internal and external sources is considered by KDA, where
inference over several task ontologies used by individual agents (DMA, OLAPA, IRA, etc.) is performed.
Moreover the sub goal of DSS-MAS is delivering of the right information at the right time and to the right
users. The system needs to be context aware and to consider the relevant features of the business, i.e. context
information such as time, location, and user preferences (Liao et al., 2005). Business users in DSS-MAS
are able to employ agents to perform tasks on their behalf. For example, managers in enterprises have to
request reports from their systems - OLAP or from transactional databases, and managers have to review
reports every appointed period of time (day, week, month, etc.). This task of information acquisition is
predecessor for decision making and is more or less straightforward - business user sends a request for analyses
and reviews the content according to some Key Performance Indicators (KPI). KPI is simply a measure of
performance and is commonly used in enterprises to evaluate how successful they are. In DSS-MAS tasks
like this are automated and user participation is reduced as much as possible. An initial analysis model
(e.g. OLAP or DM) has to be captured in the ontology by business users, while execution and optimisation
is left for agents. Business users ﬁrst deﬁne initial parameters for analyses to be performed, while agents
perform these analyses and recommend improvements. When some action is required from business user, he
is notiﬁed and has the ability to act or change rules of agent’s execution.
To enable these functionalities we introduce ontologies as a mediation mechanism for knowledge exchange
between actors (agents and business users) that cooperate in DSS-MAS. The following section will present
the structure and organization of ontologies we have used for the case study.
3.2 The role of ontology
According to Guarino (1998), ontology can be structured into diﬀerent sub-ontologies - upper ontology, domain
ontology, task ontology and the application ontology. Following similar guidelines we have deﬁned upper
ontology named Common ontology and combined domain and task ontologies in Notifying ontology ,
Information retrieval ontology ,Data Mining and Warehousing ontology (see Figure 2). The
5
Figure 1: Architecture of MAS used for Decision Support in Enterprises
6
proposed clustering of ontologies is based on the common understanding of the problem domain being deﬁned
in Common ontology. Every agent has its own interpretation of a KB, which is a specialization of a Common
ontology with detail deﬁnition of knowledge required by individual agent. Common ontology is limited to
abstract concepts and it covers reusable dimensions, which are primarily used by KDA. Task ontologies
specify concepts of notiﬁcation, IR, DM and DW. Mobile communications in our case is the domain of all
task ontologies and the emphasis is on supply and demand of mobile phones. As already mentioned, we have
used the knowledge management approach in our research where every agent has knowledge about its own
problem domain. In this case whenever new facts about the common knowledge are discovered, which might
be of interest for other agents, they are updated to the common ontology.
The role of ontology in our approach is therefore twofold:
•knowledge representation mechanism used by agents and
•common understanding of problem domain used for communication between business users and agents
by utilizing business rules manipulation with introduced templates (see section 4.2).
Figure 2 shows an excerpt from intersection of several ontologies used in our case study. This part of ontology
clearly deﬁnes the common elements being used for communication between agents and business users (domain
speciﬁc elements such as phones, new phones and customers, all described with domain speciﬁc characteristics).
A part of OLAP elements needed for conducting OLAP analyses is also presented. Ontology also presents
notiﬁcation with taxonomy of various warning levels and business users classiﬁcation by organizational unit
and decision making level.
3.3 The role of agents
Our case study uses domain of mobile telecommunications as a platform where we focus on the sales of
mobile phones and their accessories. Manipulation with internal data storage is handled by two types of
agents - OLAPA and DMA. They both have distinct tasks but still share common goal – periodically or on
demand autonomously execute analyses models. Business users at ﬁrst deﬁne these models and describe them
with all required parameters (e.g. search for anomalies in sales of Nokia phones in last month period). The
information about the execution is stored in the ontology (based on business user preferences) or is requested
by another agent of the system. Business user preferences in this context deﬁne the execution parameters
about the analysis, for example the period at which the analysis is performed (e.g. perform analysis every
other day at 13:00). OLAPA has on ﬁrsthand straightforward task of performing OLAP analyses on behalf
of an agent or a business user and reporting its ﬁndings back to the requesting entity and all other entities
that should be informed, according to the business policy. Nevertheless OLAPA does much more - after each
execution it prepares the report for business user based on ﬁndings – movements and KPIs. If certain ﬁnding
is substantially diﬀerent from ﬁnding obtained in previous case further analysis is performed to discover the
reason of change by drilling down (more detailed) or up (less detailed) the hierarchies and levels.
The knowledge is acquired in ontology. Business users can change the behaviour of agents by changing
the ontology using graphical user interface. This interface incorporates all logical restrictions deﬁned in
ontology and does not allow users to enter unacceptable values and the most important is that it does not
require technical knowledge from users. Previous our experiences have shown that business users have great
diﬃculties especially with setting the parameters required to run DM and DW analyses models. So, user
interface really has to be friendly and intuitive. In our approach this issue was solved by introducing the
architecture depicted in Figure 3 and using templates as further discussed in section 4.3.
Nowadays Web-based information retrieval systems are widely distributed and deeply analysed from diﬀerent
points of view. The main objective of all such systems is to help users to retrieve information they really
need (obviously as quickly as it is possible) (Garces et al., 2006). While the techniques regarding DW,
multi-dimensional models, OLAP, or even ad-hoc reports have served enterprises well, they do not completely
address the full scope of existing problems. It is believed that, for the business intelligence (BI) of an
enterprise, only about 20%of information can be extracted from formatted data stored in relational databases
(Tseng and Chou, 2006). The remaining 80%of information is hidden in unstructured or semi-structured
documents. This is because the most prevalent medium for expressing information and knowledge is text.
7
Figure 2: Excerpt from intersection of several ontologies used in our case study
8
Figure 3: Prototype of selected case study
For instance, market survey reports, project status reports, meeting records, customer complaints, e-mails,
patent application sheets, and advertisements of competitors now are all recorded in documents. For that
reason in DSS-MAS we introduced IRA for retrieval of data mainly from the World Wide Web. The tasks
that IRA performs in presented case study can be grouped into three categories:
•identiﬁcation of new online shops,
•analysis of mobile phones presented online and
•extending Data Warehouse with information found online.
First two tasks are concerned about the supply of mobile phones at various online shops worldwide. Identiﬁ-
cation of new online shops is conducted with web crawling and the use of several existing services on the
Internet, such as Google, Google Product Search and Bing. Not only these internet resources are managed
through ontology, but also rules for text extraction are deﬁned as rules which make all domain knowledge
available in IR ontology and not encoded in agent itself. More details about implementation of DSS-MAS
case study can be found in section 4.3. Furthermore every shop found online is analysed to identify unique
patterns for searching phones. Search patterns include guidelines for agents performing search at various web
pages. They are based on XQuery4and regular expressions. To search for phones at Google Products Search,
the following URL search pattern http://www.google.com/products?q=((\w+\s*)+) is used, accompanied
with additional information for web scrapping of required information (e.g. price, availability etc.). Using these
search patterns IRA is searching through online shops and determines phones with their market prices and
stores this information into IR ontology to be available for further knowledge inference by KDA. Information
of found phones is used to determine new market trends, enable price comparison between competitors,
facilitate possible inclusion in enterprise’s sales program, etc. One of the tasks that IRA also performs is
extending DW with information found online. While business users perform OLAP analyses, they deal
with only internal information about the business, but in process of decision making other resources also
have to be examined, e.g. news about the suppliers and competitors, opinions about certain products and
organisations, etc. IRA therefore scans the DW dimension data (through hierarchies and levels) from DW
dimensional schema and uses this information for searching several internet resources (news archives, forums,
stock changes, Google trends, etc.). When users review OLAP reports these data from the Internet is also
displayed according to their restrictions in dimensions. For example, when business users are making decision
whether to increase support to Nokia or Sony Ericsson phones it only has reports about sales of selected
brand names from their market program. Using our approach the user is provided with additional data that
is found online and what will make decision better founded. By this integration of internal and external
information users have integrated data source available that they can query from single location.
4XQuery is a query language that is designed to query collections of structured and semi-structured data
9
KDA is an important element of DSS-MAS since it consolidates all ﬁndings from IR, DM and DW and
furthermore delivers derived ﬁndings to NA. To employ inference capabilities over several ontologies the
enterprises’ BR are essential. While business concepts are captured in ontology, these concepts further
have to be restricted to deﬁne speciﬁc meaning. Generally BR are prepared by business users and also
some parts of BR in enterprises tend to change frequently; therefore we introduced architecture for BR
management (see Figure 3 and further discussion in section 4.3). Findings of KDA are presented as instances
ofDomain-specific-element andFindings classes (see ontology in Figure 2).
As it can be seen from Figure 1 NA represents an interface to DSS-MAS for all external applications
and business users. The main role of NA is the information dissemination by simply delivering the right
information at the right time to the right users. While in vast majority of today’s applications users have
to request the information using so called “pull model” in our approach we implemented the “push model”,
where information is proactively delivered by agents to the user without a speciﬁc request. This is achieved by
making system context aware and considering the relevant features of the business, i.e. context information
such as time, location, position in the organisational hierarchy, etc.
All knowledge about notiﬁcation is deﬁned in Notifying ontology, where every user has his own context
deﬁned and the position within organisation across two dimensions - organisational unit (e.g. Marketing, Sales,
Human resources, etc.) and decision making level (e.g. Chief Executive Oﬃcer (CEO), Chief Information
Oﬃcer (CIO), Chief Financial Oﬃcer (CFO), Chief Marketing Oﬃcer (CMO), Chief Analytics Oﬃcer (CAO),
etc.). According to that position rules for delivery of several message types are deﬁned. These message types
range from Notiﬁcation to Warning and Critical alert. Each message also addresses the domain of speciﬁc
organisational unit, e.g. when a new mobile phone is found online at competitor’s website, CMO and CAO
have to be notiﬁed. Organisational structure, as part of Notifying ontology, also deﬁnes that both CMO and
CAO are inferior to CEO therefore he is also notiﬁed, but only in a case of a Critical alert. According to the
business user proﬁle, notiﬁcation can be sent using several technologies from Windows Alert, e-mail, Really
Simple Syndication (RSS), Short Message Service (SMS), etc. These notiﬁcation types are also ordered by
priority for each business user and according to this type the content is also adapted.
Mobile agent is an example of an application that can reside on a mobile device (e.g. Personal Digital
Assistant (PDA), mobile phone, etc.) and uses resources of DSS-MAS through NA. The typical use case
includes sending mobile agent across network to DSS-MAS, where all needed information according to owner
context is collected and then the mobile agent is returned back to originating location on a mobile device and
presents the collected data to business user. When the process of acquiring data is in progress, business user
does not have to be connected to the network, he can just wait oﬄine until mobile agent is ready to return
with the ﬁndings.
In the following section details about the case study implementation will be presented with technologies used,
templates for business rules acquisition and presentation of one speciﬁc scenario from case study.
4 Case study implementation and discussion
4.1 Technology
The selected language for ontology presentation is OWL DL (Russomanno and Kothari, 2004), since it oﬀers
the highest level of semantic expressiveness for selected case study and is one of the most widely used and
standardised ontology language nowadays that has extensive support in diﬀerent ontology manipulation tools.
Besides OWL logical restrictions, Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) rules were also used due to its
human readable syntax and support for business rules oriented approach to knowledge management (Horrocks
et al., 2005). SWRL rules are stored as OWL individuals and are described by OWL classes contained in
the SWRL ontology. The use of SWRL enables storing schema, individuals and rules in a single component,
which makes management much easier. SWRL rule form in a combination with templates that is introduced
in the following subsection b is very suitable for knowledge formalization by business users that do not have
extensive technical knowledge.
10
The ontology manipulation interface for business users is based on Protégé Ontology Editor and Knowledge
Acquisition System (Stanford Medical Informatics, 2006a) and SWRL Tab (Stanford Medical Informatics,
2006b) for Protégé. It enables entering OWL individuals and SWRL rules where a step further is made towards
using templates for entering information (see Figure 3). At the execution level KAON2 inference engine is
used to enable inference capabilities. Due to limitation of SHIQ (D)subset of OWL-DL and DL-safe subset of
SWRL language, before inference is conducted, semantic validation takes place to ensure that all preconditions
are met. We selected FIPA5compliant MAS platform JADE6in DSS-MAS because it oﬀers broad range of
functionalities and is most widely used platform. This is due to very good support and availability of agent
framework, where a lot of common agents’ tasks are already implemented (i.e. agent communication at the
syntax level, agent management, migration of agents, etc.). For Mobile Agent implementation an add-on
JADE-LEAP7was used to support the mobility of agents.
4.2 Mediation with BR templates
Using templates with ontology, business logic is excluded from the actual software code whereas the majority
of data for templates is acquired from ontology axioms and natural language descriptions in ontology, while
other templates are prepared by users with technical knowledge. The main goal of using mediation with
BR templates is to enable acquiring knowledge from actual knowledge holders i.e. business users and enable
transformation of this high-level knowledge into information system level, where this data together with
concepts from business vocabulary can be directly used for inference purposes and bring added value without
any further programming by technically educated users.
When acquiring new knowledge into the system from business users, the process always starts with focusing
on concepts of business vocabulary that are persisted in a form of ontology. Users can freely traverse through
this information space, select concepts and further manipulate all related information within the selected
context. Altering and adding new information is all time limited to formal deﬁnition of concepts that is
deﬁned in ontology. For easier manipulation business user is aided with template and business vocabulary, so
BR building process is simpliﬁed as it will be presented in detail in the following section.
Example 4.1 presents a BR template that is used for deﬁnition of aggregation of ﬁndings or domain speciﬁc
elements. The user interface that is available is directly linked to ontology, where constraints on classes,
properties and individuals are considered in realtime. This approach allows to minimize the risk of entering
wrong constraints. The DSS-MAS system supports entering of new statements in several forms from simple
IF-THEN form to decision table or decision tree.
Example 4.1 (BR template for general ﬁnding deﬁnition) .
IF
Condition ={∃x:x∈Domain speciﬁc element ∪Finding}∧|Condition|≥1
THEN
Result ={∃y:y∈Finding}∧|Result|≥1
The following Example 4.2 represents a BR that states: If there exist two consequent increases of
sold phones of the same phone brand and a new phone of this phone brand was found online
within last 2 weeks, then offer a promotion discount of 10% on this new phone to all new
customers.
5Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA)
6Java Agent DEvelopment Framework (JADE)
7Java Agent Development Environment-Lightweight Extensible Agent Platform (JADE-LEAP)
11
Example 4.2 (Example of a rule, developed by using template) .
IF
First ﬁnding isIncrease (Finding) which{
isrelated to ﬁrst amount sold which isMeasure (OLAP element) AND
isrelated to ﬁrst date which isDimension (OLAP element) AND
isrelated to ﬁrst phone which isPhone (Domain speciﬁc element) which{
hascharacteristic brandwhich isPhone brand (Domain speciﬁc characteristic)
}
}AND
Second ﬁnding isIncrease (Finding) which{
isrelated to second amount sold which isMeasure (OLAP element) AND
isrelated to second date which isDimension (OLAP element) which{
isgreater than ﬁrst date
}AND
isrelated to second phone which isPhone (Domain speciﬁc element) which{
hascharacteristic brandwhich isPhone brand (Domain speciﬁc characteristic)
}
}AND
Found phone isNew phone (Domain speciﬁc element) which{
hascharacteristic brandwhich isPhone brand (Domain speciﬁc element) AND
hasdate of appearance found date which isDimension (OLAP element) which{
isgreater than now - 14 days
}
}AND
New customer isNew customer (Domain speciﬁc element)
THEN
Promotion discount isDiscount price (Finding) which{
isrelated to new customer AND
isrelated to found phone AND
hasvalue ”10”AND
hasunit ”%”
}
When constraint presented in Example 4.2 is transformed to execution form at information system level,
standardized SWRL and OWL languages are used to enable reusability (see Figure 4). By this transformation
a rule is produced that can be directly used in the inference engine to produce results in a form of inferred
triples that are presented to the user.
4.3 Case study
One of the most common cases of using DSS-MAS system is combing information found online with BI reports
(DW, DM, IR, etc.) developed on internal data in enterprise DW. Figure 5 presents one of this scenario.
Scenario presented at Figure 5 is triggered by results of IRA activity, when three new mobile phones: Apple
iPhone 3GS ,Nokia E72 andSony Ericsson Xperia 1 are found by IRA at online mobile shops. According
12
Figure 4: Constraint presented in ontology in SWRL and OWL syntax
to the execution policy from Common ontology, OLAPA is notiﬁed with a request to rebuild all DW reports
where brands of identiﬁed phones can be found in dimension elements. After running OLAP on Sales schema
with constrains of Nokia brand in Phone dimension and last year in Date dimension OLAPA creates a report
as depicted in Example 4.3.
Example 4.3 (Business Intelligence ﬁndings) .
[Phone ]by brand [Nokia ], by date [Q1, 2010 ]→[Amount sold ],[risen by 11,23%]
[Phone ]by brand [Nokia ], by date [Last month ]→[Amount sold ],[risen by 5,87%]
At the information system level the ﬁrst ﬁnding is represented as an excerpt from ontology and is depicted in
Figure 6.
The ﬁelds that appear in the report are all instances of Domain speciﬁc element ,OLAP element and
Finding from ontology (see Figure 2). After these ﬁndings have been asserted, KDA will be executed to
derive new knowledge. Based on these new facts represented at Example 4.3 and enterprise business rules (see
Example 4.2), the KDA produced results represented in Example 4.4, by using inference engine knowledge is
asserted in ontology.
Example 4.4 (Derived ﬁnding) .
[New customer ],[Nokia E72 ]→[Promotion discount ],[10%]
After consolidation of all new ﬁndings KDA sends message to NA with request to forward notiﬁcations to
appropriate users. The result of triggered activity of NA is the list of business users that have to be notiﬁed
about this event. The list shows that in this case CMO and CEO have to be notiﬁed whereas their context
has to be considered. According to CMO’s preferences an e-mail is sent with the following content presented
in Example 4.5.
Example 4.5 (Report of ﬁndings with explanation) .
FACTS
New [Phone ][Nokia E72 ]is available on the market.
[Amount sold ]of[Phone ]by brand [Nokia ]and by date [Q1, 2010 ]have [risen by 11,23%]
and by date [last month ]have [risen by 5,87%].
CONCLUSION
[Phone ][Nokia E72 ]should be oﬀered to [new customer ]and oﬀered at [promotion discount ]
of[10%].
13
Figure 5: Case study of using DSS-MAS in mobile phone domain
Figure 6: Example of representing the ﬁnding in ontology
14
The CEO uses a Mobile Agent on his mobile device and is also notiﬁed by a truncated message with new
ﬁnding, while explanation is available upon request.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have discussed DSS-MAS where internal and external data is integrated using agent-oriented
approach and ontologies as a common understanding of a problem domain and for communication between
business users and agents. Agents were used due to their mentalistic notions for modelling, similarities
between the agent in the MAS paradigm and the human actor in business organisations, and also possibilities
for the use of ontologies as means of agents’ internal knowledge base representation. The external information
from the Web was integrated by IRA agent with the data in organisation’s DW and after applying BR new
knowledge was derived by employing agents’ inference capabilities. Tasks like information retrieval from
competitors, creating and reviewing OLAP reports are autonomously performed by agents, while business
users have control over their execution through manipulation of knowledge base. The research also has
emphasized agent-to-business user communication, trying to minimize that gap. This was accomplished
by introducing diﬀerent views on ontologies for business user and agent. While agents deal with formal
description of business concepts, logical constraints and rules, business user has a simpliﬁed view of formal
description of knowledge. User is able to manipulate with ontology through templates, where little technical
knowledge is required. The mediation mechanism transforms these business level concepts into formal
speciﬁcation at the level of information system.
Presented approach was veriﬁed and implemented using a case study from the domain of mobile telecommu-
nications, where the aim was to provide the knowledge worker an intelligent analysis platform that enhances
decision making process. The application domain was reduced to its sub domain dedicated for supply and
analysis of demand of mobile phones in one of the mobile operators. DW system is constructed from several
heterogeneous data sources where majority of those sources are internal to the enterprise. Our approach
added information found on the Web (i.e. competitors’ oﬀers, stock rates, etc.) to these internal data sources
and improved the decision support process within the enterprise. The proposed approach also addressed
business users and their communication with the system which was simpliﬁed by using templates to deﬁne
some business requirements that were transformed into analyses models (OLAP, DW, etc.), automatically
performed by agents which reported results back to users in charge. The case study presented in the paper
was implemented in Java and using mainly open source technologies.
References
Bernaras, A., Laresgoiti, I., and Corera, J. (1996). Building and reusing ontologies for electrical network
applications. In European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI ’96) .
Buche, P., Dibie-Barthelemy, J., Haemmerle, O., and Hignette, G. (2006). Fuzzy semantic tagging and
ﬂexible querying of XML documents extracted from the Web. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems ,
26(1):25–40.
Cao, L. B., Chao, L., Dan, L., and Li, L. (2004). Ontology services-based information integration in mining
telecom business intelligence. Pricai 2004: Trends in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Proceedings , 3157:85–94.
Chen, M., Zhu, Q. M., and Chen, Z. X. (2001). An integrated interactive environment for knowledge discovery
from heterogeneous data resources. Information and Software Technology , 43(8):487–496.
Clark, K. L. and McCabe, F. G. (2007). Ontology schema for an agent belief store. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies , 65(7):640–658.
Davies, J., Studer, R., and Warren, P. (2006). Semantic Web technologies - trends and research in ontology-
based systems . John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, England.
15
Dzemydiene, D. and Tankeleviciene, L. (2009). Multi-layered knowledge-based architecture of the adaptable
distance learning system. Technological and Economic development of Economy , 15(2):229–244.
Fuentes, V., Carbo, J., and Molina, J. M. (2006). Heterogeneous domain ontology for location based
information system in a multi-agent framework. Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning -
Ideal 2006, Proceedings , 4224:1199–1206.
Garces, P. J., Olivas, J. A., and Romero, F. P. (2006). Concept-matching IR systems versus word-matching
information retrieval systems: Considering fuzzy interrelations for indexing Web pages. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57(4):564–576.
Gruber, T. R. (1993). A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Speciﬁcations. Knowledge Acquisition ,
5(2):199–220.
Guarino, N. (1998). Formal Ontology and Information Systems. In FOIS’98, pages 3–15. IOS Press.
Horrocks, I., Patel-Schneider, P. F., Bechhofer, S., and Tsarkov, D. (2005). OWL rules: A proposal and
prototype implementation. Journal of Web Semantics , 3(1):23–40.
Jovanović, J. and Gašević, D. (2005). Achieving knowledge interoperability: An XML/XSLT approach.
Expert Systems with Applications , 29(3):535–553.
Kang, N. and Han, S. (2003). Agent-based e-marketplace system for more fair and eﬃcient transaction.
Decision Support Systems , 34(2):157–165.
Kishore, R., Zhang, H., and Ramesh, R. (2006). Enterprise integration using the agent paradigm: foundations
of multi-agent-based integrative business information systems. Decision Support Systems , 42(1):48–78.
Lei, Y., Motta, E., and Dominque, J. (2002). IIPS: An Intelligent information presentation system. In 7th
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces .
Liao, L. J., Xu, K. Q., and Liao, S. S. Y. (2005). Constructing intelligent and open mobile commerce using a
semantic web approach. Journal of Information Science , 31(5):407–419.
Macias, J. A. and Castells, P. (2007). Providing end-user facilities to simplify ontology-driven web application
authoring. Interacting with Computers , 19(4):563–585.
Marotta, A., Motz, R., and Ruggia, R. (2002). Managing source schema evolution in Web Warehouses.
journal of the Brazilian Computer Society , 8(2):20–31.
Orgun, B. and Vu, J. (2006). HL7 ontology and mobile agents for interoperability in heterogeneous medical
information systems. Computers in Biology and Medicine , 36(7-8):817–836.
Qiu, R. G. (2006). Towards ontology-driven knowledge synthesis for heterogeneous information systems.
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing , 17(1):99–109.
Rivest, S., Bedard, Y., Proulx, M. J., Nadeau, M., Hubert, F., and Pastor, J. (2005). SOLAP technology:
Merging business intelligence with geospatial technology for interactive spatio-temporal exploration and
analysis of data. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 60(1):17–33.
Russomanno, D. J. and Kothari, C. R. (2004). Expressing inter-link constraints in OWL knowledge bases.
Expert Systems , 21(4):217–228.
Shan, F., Jun, M., Chao, T., and Xu, L. D. (2003). A programmable agent for knowledge discovery on the
web.Expert Systems , 20(2):79–85.
Shim, J. P., Warkentin, M., Courtney, J. F., Power, D. J., Sharda, R., and Carlsson, C. (2002). Past, present,
and future of decision support technology. Decision Support Systems , 33(2):111–126.
Singh, S., Vajirkar, P., and Lee, Y. (2003). Context-based data mining using ontologies. Conceptual Modeling
- ER 2003, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 2813:405–418.
16
Soo, V. W., Lin, S. Y., Yang, S. Y., Lin, S. N., and Cheng, S. L. (2006). A cooperative multi-agent
platform for invention based on patent document analysis and ontology. Expert Systems with Applications ,
31(4):766–775.
Stanford Medical Informatics (2006a). Protégé.
Stanford Medical Informatics (2006b). SWRLTab.
Suomela, S. and Kekalainen, J. (2006). User evaluation of ontology as query construction tool. Information
Retrieval , 9(4):455–475.
Tewari, G., Youll, J., and Maes, P. (2003). Personalized location-based brokering using an agent-based
intermediary architecture. Decision Support Systems , 34(2):127–137.
Trkman, P., Štemberger, M. I., Jaklič, J., and Groznik, A. (2007). Process approach to supply chain
integration. Supply chain management - An International journal , 12(2):116–128.
Tseng, F. S. C. and Chou, A. Y. H. (2006). The concept of document warehousing for multi-dimensional
modeling of textual-based business intelligence. Decision Support Systems , 42(2):727–744.
Vahidov, R. and Kersten, G. E. (2004). Decision station: situating decision support systems. Decision Support
Systems, 38(2):283–303.
Vasilecas, O. and Bugaite, D. (2006). Ontology-based information systems development: The problem of
automation of information processing rules. In Advances in Information Systems, Proceedings , volume 4243
ofLecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 187–196.
Zhou, L., Booker, Q. E., and Zhang, D. (2002). ROD - Toward Rapid Ontology Development for Underdevel-
oped Domains. In 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , pages 957–965.
17
