2351-9789 © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V . This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of AHFE Conference
doi: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.286  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
ScienceDirect
6th International Conference on Applied Huma n Factors and Ergonomics (AHFE 2015) and the 
Affiliated Conferences, AHFE 2015
Ontology focused crowdsourcing management
Ari Sivula, Jussi Kantola
University of Vaasa, Department of Production, Wolffintie 34, 65200 Vaasa, Finland
Abstract
Com panies should be aware of the market si tuation and ha ve a connection to cust omers, possible customers, and other 
individuals around a company. Crowdsourci ng is the act of going inside or outside of the company’s normal organizational set -up 
to an undefined crowd, and it 
can be ut ilized in several ways to  produce value for a company. Ontologies provide a better 
unde rstanding of different concepts and can be utilized for managing a company’s activ ities in a holistic way. This paper 
introduces ontology -focused crowdsourcing mana gement. Crowdsourcing of a compan y is constructed via several concepts 
which are crucial for succeeding in crow dsourcing activities. Current crowdsourcing ontology studies  are lacking in holistic 
crowdsourcing views. This paper fills th e research gap, providing a holistic view of crowdsourcing and its management.
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review und
er responsibility of AHFE Conference.
Keywords: Crowdsourcing; Industrial management; Ontology
1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing provides several o pportunities for a company. Crowdsour cing as a phenomenon is complex, 
connecting several fields of management. Generally, crowds ourcing is the act of going inside or outside of the 
company’s normal organizational set -up to an undefined crowd [1, 2, 3]. However, crowdsourcing requires an 
onto
logical understanding for generating new models for companies to develop their activities. The last decade of 
research on ontology alignment brought a wide variety of automatic methods and techniques to discover 
correspondences between ontologies [4]. Ontologies enable the understanding of real world concepts and provide possibilities for developing information technology (IT) sy stems focused on ontologies [5]. Crowdsourcing includes 
a human element which, therefore, is  challenging for ontological modeling.© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V . This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of AHFE Conference
633  Ari Sivula and Jussi Kantola  /  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 
Crowdsourcing, as all other activities of a company, requires management. Kantola claims that all decisions 
should be based on real, holistic knowledge, instead of ed ucated guesses, intuitive feeling, or limited information 
representing only some aspects of the objects managed [6]. Crowdsourcing activities should be managed for 
increasing profitability a result of crowdsourced activity. On tologies provide the opportunity for understanding the 
crowdsourcing phenomenon and its priority for a company.
The current crowdsourcing literature discusses ontologies by concisely providing important intensive knowledge 
about crowdsourcing [4, 7, 8]. However, more knowledge is required for understanding crowdsourcing ontologies in a holistic context. This paper fills th e research gap and presents an ontology -based approach for crowdsourcing 
manage 
ment and aims for a more holistic understanding about crowdsourcing and its utilization as a company’s 
activity.
This paper is organized as follows. The theoretical framework of the study is highlighted in section two. Section 
three discusses the methodological choices of the study. The fourth section sheds light on ontology -based 
crowdsou
rcing management, before the paper concludes.
2. Theoretical framework
This section sheds light
 on the relevant literature for the study. First, crowdsourcing literature is highlighted. The 
second section discusses ontologies and their importance. Finally, management of ontologies is highlighted in this section .
2.1. Crowdsourcing
Crowdso
urcing provides, for instance knowledge about markets, for a company. However, crowdsourcing is still 
a relatively new concept for businesses and science. Howe introduced the concept of crowdsourcing in Wired
magazine in 2006 and defined it “the act of taking a job traditionally performed by a designated agent (usually an employee) and outsourcing it to an undefined, generally large group of people in the form of an open call” [3, 9]. Howe’s crowdsourcing definition can be kept as an origin al definition of crowdsourcing. Crowdsourcing can apply 
to both a company’s internal or external activity, and the si ze of the crowd can vary based on the task type and scope 
[10, 11]. Crowdsourcing happens mostly online, but not exclusively so [12]. Online platforms can be used for task setting, but the actual crowdsourced work can be implemented offline. Therefore, crowdsourcing can occur offline as well as online.
Crowdsourcing can be utilized widely, but a comp any’s innovation activities especially can employ 
crowdsourcing. Crowdsourcing can be utilized, for instance, for quality verification, collecting ideas, testing products and services, funding an innovation, finding customer clusters, and c o-operations [10]. Thus, 
crowdsourcing can b
e employed not only in innovation activities, but in other activities as well. Crowdsourcing 
includes three main categories, which are knowledge, resource, and funding focused. Crowdsourcing types are, for instance, crowd wisdom, crowd creatio n, microtasking, macrotasking, and crowdfunding [13]. Nevertheless, all 
crowdsourcing types include utilization of an undefined crowd and might include tangible or intangible compensation. Tangible compensations can be, for example, pay or a product, and intangible compensations could be recognition or status [14]. Selection of compensation depends on the crowdsourced task type, scope, and demanded results of the crowdsourced activity. Compensation can influence the quality of the results of an crowdsourced task .
2.2. Ontologies
Ontolog
ies concern the nature of reality and raise questions about human assumptions about the way the world 
operates and the commitment to particular views [15]. Moreover, an ontology is an explicit specification of a conceptualization which is an abstract, simplified view of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose [16]. 
Ontologies provide perceptions and understanding of terms, concepts, and their relationships, and can provide a lot of information or just a small amount information depending on the ontology and its concepts.
634   Ari Sivula and Jussi Kantola  /  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 
Ontologies can be highly informal if they are expressed in common language, semi -informal if expressed in 
common language in a restricted, st ructured, or formal 
manner, semi- formal if expressed in an artificial and formally 
defin
ed language, and rigorously formal if they provide meticulously defined terms with formal semantics, 
theorems, and proofs of properties and completeness [17]. Ontologies provide a way to communicate with devices, 
the internet, and between people when concepts are understood. Modern technologies, for instance, the Internet of Things, require ontologies for exchanging the data between servers, machines, and people [18]. Therefore, it is necessary to understand how ontologies are connected to one another and which concepts a single ontology includes. This is especially important for a crowdsourcing ontology, which includes human and technological elements .
2.3.Management of ontologies
Kantola argue
s that ontologies could provide an approach to specify and manage management objects in a 
holistic way [19]. Managers can understand objects, which are part of a company, more holistically using ontologies. The ingenious management framework highlights the needs of ontologies and instances in management [6]. Figure 1 illustrates the ingenious management framework .
Fig. 1. The ingenious management framework [19].
Members of a company gain organizational resources in thei r sensible experience, as illustrated in Figure 1 [6]. 
Kantola specifies these organizational resources as ontologies (MOOs: Management Object Ontologies) [19]. A system boundary can exist in some ontologies but not others. Those which have a system boundary can produce metaknowledge [6]. Evolute technology can be utilized for evaluating ontologies linguistically [6]. The ingenious management framework provides an opportunity for understanding objects around a company, and managing them with a high degree of consciousness, because management objects are understood.
Crowdsourcing includes interacti on between the crowd and a company.  Generally, crowdsourcing activities 
include public or private online platforms which can be used for managing the crowd with ontologies. A crowdsourcing ontology provides understanding about crow dsourcing concepts; therefore, crowdsourcing activities 
can be managed more effectively and knowledge can be used more diversely between humans and machines .
635  Ari Sivula and Jussi Kantola  /  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 
3. Methodology
This study is based on empirical research conducted by Sivula and Kantola [10, 13, 20] and Sivula et al. [21]. 
Empirical data included 18 case companies which are acting in a wide range of industries. Case companies provided 
experiences and utilizations of crowdsourcing in innovation -related activities. Crowdsourcing has several definitions 
in the literature and in th
e terminology of case companies. Thus, the holistic crowdsourcing ontology is demanded 
for the filling of this gap. An ontological model is constructed from several concepts utilizing empirical evidence 
and the literature.
The ontology in this study is conceptualization of crowdsourcing. Concepts include sub -concepts that build actual 
concepts
. One concept can have several sub -concepts. Moreover, ontology has multiple concepts which are 
construct
ed based on empirical evidence. This paper describes the holistic crowdsourcing ontology which can be 
utilized in several ways for developing the management of crowdsourcing and concepts related to it in a company. Crowdsourcing ontology can be utilized by machines and humans in knowledge creation and sharing. Therefore, 
crowdsourcing ontology can be utilized in several IT systems as well.
The internet -based Evolute system can be used for a model crowdsourcing ontology, which managers can utilize 
in man 
agement activities. The Evolute system provides visually presented results and knowledge of instance -based 
reasonin
g to justify decisions and actions regarding management objects [19]. Crowdsourcing ontology is a 
management object that can be, ther efore, modeled for the Evolute system  and utilized in management activities .
4. Ontology based approach for managing cro wdsourcing
Crowdsourcing is a relatively new concept and involves seve ral areas in management. Ontology in this paper is 
company -based and can be seen as a unit benefiting from  crowdsourcing. M oreover, crowdsourcing generally 
requires an online platform, which is utilized for interac ting with the crowd. Figure 2 illustrates crowdsourcing 
ontology .
Fig. 2. Crowdsourcing ontology .
Multiple concepts relate to crowdsourcing as illustrate d in Figure 2. A crowdsourcing ontology provides a 
holistic understanding for managing crowdsourcing operations. The following sub -sections describe concepts which 
are relate
d to crowdsourcing ontology .
636   Ari Sivula and Jussi Kantola  /  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 
4.1. Openness
Crowdsourcing requires openness from a company. However, a company does not have to be entirely open to the 
crowd. Openness as a concept can be either closed, interna lly open, or externally open. If a company is closed and 
does not want to deliver any information to the crowd, then crowdsourcing activities can be challenging to execute 
because the crowd needs to have enough information to implement the required task. If crowdsourcing is 
implemented internally, then only the internal crowd of a company needs to have information. External openness is required when crowdsourcing activities occur outside of a company. However, a company can also define which 
knowledge it will deliver to the crowd. It does not have to  contribute full knowledge about the task or entity which
the crowdsourced task supports .
4.2. Platform
Crowdsourci
ng activities require an online platform whic h can be collaboration based. Crowdsourcing platforms 
provide an opportunity for a company to manage the crowdsourced tasks and can be owned by a company itself or a third party that provides crowdsourcing as a service. Moreover, crowdfunding platforms require features for transferring funds and marketing a product or service which will be developed. Commonly these operations are 
implemented by means of videos and attractive web sites. Social media platforms can be utilized in crowdsourcing activities, as well. Facebook or  Twitter can be used, for inst ance, to evaluate and genera te ideas of a company, and 
to test the market demand of a new product or service resulting from explored ideas .
4.3. Management
Crowds o
urcing requires several types of management. Co ordination of the crowd is essential to crowdsourcing 
activities. Coordination has an effect on results which a co mpany receives from crowds ourced task. Crowdsourced 
tasks include risks which can be, for instance, failure of im plementing a product or service, failure to recruit crowd 
contributors, or recruitment of a crowd representing only one customer group of a company. Risks need to be identified, and managed properly if they materialize. Moreov er, the quality of the results should be managed in order 
to generate better results for a company. Crowdsourced task implementation can have a long or short time horizon, depending on the crowdsourced task type and complexity, which also need to be managed.
4.4. Resource
Crowdsourci
ng tasks require resources from a company.  Planning, managing, and execution of crowdsourcing 
tasks demands time, which can be seen as one of the most important resources of a company. Knowledge about 
crowdsourcing and its models are requir ed for succeeding in crow dsourcing activities. Economic support is required 
for crowdsourcing tasks for implementing crowdsourcing serv ices or utilization of services provided by a third
party. However, social networks and other widely used crowdsourcing platforms can be utilized as well. Resources 
have a direct connection to the succes s of the crowdsourced task, and therefore a company’s management should 
always consider when it could utilize crowdsourcing in its activities.
4.5. Compensation
The comp
ensation of a crowdsourcing activity can be tangi ble or intangible. The comp ensation type is connected 
to the task that the crowd implements. A company should consider tangible compensations if a task is extensive. If a 
crowdsourced task is not extensive then intangible compensations may be considered. However, small contributions from the crowd could lead to major profits for a compan y, which should therefore consider utilizing tangible 
compensations for motivating the crowd if the task achievement is important to the company. Moreover, a company should be aware of techniques that can be utilized fo r recruiting crowd contributors who, at the final stage, 
637  Ari Sivula and Jussi Kantola  /  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 
implement the crowdsourced task. A company should analyze which compensations would match the specific 
crowdsourcing task for the purposes of motivating the crowd .
4.6. Task
A compan
y can crowdsource several tasks, including part s of its strategy. Crowdsourcing can be utilized, for 
example, in the value creation process, the measurement of management performance, and provide knowledge about 
new markets. These tasks can be divided between internal and external crowdsourcing tasks. Crowdsourcing can be 
used for idea generation and as a model for implementing an innovation. Implementation of innovations can be carried out partly or entirely with crowdsourcing. Moreover, crowdsourcing can be used for evaluating a company’s products, services, and processes. Therefore,  utilization of crowdsourcing can be a wide -scale part of a company’s 
activity .
4.7. Foc
us
Crowdsourcing has three main types, which are knowledge, resource, and funding focused. Knowledge -focused 
crowdsourcing ach
ieves a task by utilizing the crowd’s knowl edge in creating value for a company. A task can be, 
for instance, simple feedback which is commonly utilized in  internet stores in evaluating products and services. 
Resource -focused crowdsourcing tasks are more intensive and requires more time for task achievement from the 
crowd. Th
e task can be, for instance, programming software or implementing a technology -based innovation 
entirely. InnoCen
tive is a service which was one of the fi rst of this kind of crowdsourcing activity [22]. Moreover, 
crowdsourcing can be fund -focused, also known as crowdfunding. Fund -focused crowdsourcing is utilized for 
collecti
ng micro or macro amounts of capital from the crowd in order to finance a company’s activity. Kickstarter is 
one of the most commonly utilized fund -focused crowdsourcing platform for innovations [23].
4.8. Maturity level
The crowdsourcing
 maturity level of a company affect s its crowdsourcing activities. Holistic crowdsourcing 
ontology follows a four -level maturity model implemented by Bartlett [24]. A company can be seen as elementary 
(Level 1) if it can use 
crowdsourcing to generate in cremental improvements on focused topics, typically only 
affecting the internal crowd. A company is emerging (Level 2) when it can use crowdsourcing to generate ideas to 
incrementally improve specific tactics and strategies a ffecting the company’s bottom line or customer interface. A 
company is established (Level 3) if it can use crowdsourcing to effect innovative change in areas that are crucial to 
the company’s business model, by co -creating solutions with customers and business partners. A company is 
exemplary (Le
vel 4) if it can use crowdsourcing to uncover industry -transforming paradigm shifts, engaging a broad 
cross -section of stakeholders, and even competitors. Comp anies are commo nly beginning to utilize crowdsourcing 
at an elementary level, which is ther efore an essential step for a company .
5. Conclusions
This pa
per discussed an ontology -based management approach for crowdsourcing and provided several 
perception
s on the topic. Crowdsourcing is a still a relatively new concept for businesses and science, and therefore 
requires the development of a holistic ontology. Crowdsourcing can be a useful model for a company’s activities and holistic ontology provides new way of managing crowds ourcing operations. Therefor e, crowdsourcing requires 
management, which can be based on crowdsourcing management ontology. Crowdsourcing ontology provides eight 
concepts which managers can utilize for managing crowds ourcing activities. Ontology includes openness, platform, 
management, resource, compensation, task, focus, and matur ity concepts. These concepts affect the final results and 
value which a company receives from crowdsourcing activities.
Crowdsourcing ontology can be utilized by managers in understanding the state of crowdsourcing in the 
company. The definition of crowdsourcing ontology provided in this paper should be empirically tested in the future. The Evolute system can be utilized for the modeling and testing of crowdsourcing ontology in fuzzy -logic -
638   Ari Sivula and Jussi Kantola  /  Procedia Manufacturing   3  ( 2015 )  632 – 638 
based IT systems. Moreover, it is suggested that indicators are developed for crowdsourcing ontology which 
indicate a specific concept and sub -concept. It would create value for testing the crowdsourcing ontology with the 
Evolut
e system in several case companies. Neverthe less, companies can utilize crowdsourcing ontology for 
understanding the state of crowdsourcing in their current activities and develop their management processes based on the ontology .
References
[1] D.C. Brabham, Crowds ourcing as a Model for Problem Solving: An Introdu ction and Cases, Convergence: The International Journ al of 
Research into New Media Technologies, 2008, pp. 75 -90.
[2] R. Dawson, S. Bynghall ,Getting
 Results from Crowds: The Defi nitive Guide to Using Crowdsourcing to  Grow Your Business, second ed., 
Advanced Hu
man Technologies, San Francisco, 2012 .
[3] J. Howe, C
rowdsourcing: A definition ,Online (Accessed 24.1.2015), 2015, h ttp://www.crowdsourci ng.com/index.htm l.
[4]C. Sarasua, E. Simperl, N.F. Noy, CROWDMAP: Crowdsourcing Ont ology Alignment with Microtasks ,Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
Volume 764 9,
 2012, pp. 525- 541.
[5]R.Y.K. Lau, Li, C., Liao, S.S.Y. ,Social analytics: Learning fuzzy product ontologies for aspect -oriented sentim ent analysis ,Decision Support 
Systems 6
5,2014, pp. 80- 94.
[6] J.I. Kantola ,Ontology -Based Resource Management ,Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing ,2009, pp. 1- 13.
[7]J . M . Mortensen ,Crowdsourcing Ontology Verification ,Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 8219 ,2013, pp. 448- 455.
[8]D .Geiger, M. Schader ,Personalized task recommendation in  crowdsourcing in formation syste ms -Current state of the art, Decision Support 
Systems 6
5,2014, pp. 3- 16.
[9] J. Howe, The R
ise of Crowdsourcing, Online (A ccessed 26.1.2015), 2006, http://archiv e.wire d.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html .
[10]A. Sivula, J. Kantola ,Combining crowdsourcing and Porter’s value chain ,International Journal of Advanced Logistics 3,2014, pp. 17- 26.
[11]H. Simula, M. Vuori, Benefits and Barriers of Crowdsourcing in B2B Firms:  Generating Ideas with Internal and Ex ternal Crowds ,
International Journal of Innov ation Managem ent 16, 2012, pp. 1 -19.
[12]J. Prpic, P.P. Shukla ,J.H. Kietzmann, I.P. McCarthy. How to work a cr owd: Developing crowd ca pital through crowdsour cing,Business 
Horizons 58, 2015, pp.
 77-85.
[13]A. Sivula, J. Kantola ,Adapting crowdsourcing in  innovation man agement ,International Journal of Innov ation and Learning, In press 
(
forthcoming).
[14]V - V .Handolin, Employee’s experiences about non -material rewards (Dissertation), Acta Wasaensia, Vaasa, 2013 .
[15]M .Saunders, P. Lewis, A. Thornhill, Research Met hods for Business Students ,Fifth ed., Pearson Education Lim ited, Essex, 2009 .
[16]T .R. Gruber ,Toward Principles for the Design of On tologies Used for Knowledge Sharing ,International Journal Human- Computer Studies
43,1993, pp. 907 -928.
[17]A .Gomez- Perez, M. Fernandez -Lopez ,O. Corcho, Ontological Engineering: with exp els from the areas of Knowledge Management, e -
Commerce and the Semantic Web, Springer -Verlag London Limited, London, 2004 .
[18]Y. Wang, P. Zeng, H. Yu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang ,Energy Tree Dynamics of Smart Grid Based on Industrial Internet of Things ,International 
Journal of Distribu
ted Sensor Networks ,2013, pp. 1- 27.
[19]J.I.Kantola, Ingenious Management (Dissertation), Acta Universitatis Ta mperensis, Tampere, 2005 .
[20]A. Sivula, J. Kantola ,Crowdsourcing in a Project Lifecycle ,Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, Volume 185 ,2014, pp. 221-
232.
[21]A. Sivula, J. Kantola, H. Vanharanta, M. Salo ,Crowdsourcing in Strategic Management ,Proceedings of the 11th International Conference 
on Innovation & Manage
ment ,2014, pp. 613- 623.
[22] InnoC entive ,InnoC entive, Online (Accessed 29.1.2015), 2015, http://www.innocentive.com /.
[23
]Kickstarter ,Kickstarter, Online (Acce ssed 29.1.2015), 2015, https://www.kickstarter.com /.
[24]S. Bartlett ,Harnessing the Creativity and Wisdom of Crowds, Online (Acc essed 29.1.2015), 2013, htt p://bridgeable.com/harnessing -the-
creativity -and-wisdom -of-crowds/.
