 

 
 
 
 
Abstract -- Our study  involves a ssociating a context with semantic indexes and 
descriptors  based on  topic maps for e fficient ontology -driven data managelent 
(e.g. blogs, c ooperative platforms, digital libraries, document versioning tools, 
etc.). We believe that supporting  contextual semantic s can add a set of properties 
that vary according to the use of ontological topic maps  (TM) . Their  use is 
beneficial for users who inte nd to exchange semantic knowledge in an application 
domain. Existing semantic layers in current systems  are not yet capable of 
supporting relevant contextual  semantic description.  In this paper, we aim at 
extending the  many -sorted algebra formalizing  the topic maps  layer in order to 
support 5W1H context s (What, Why, Where, Who, When and H ow) using 
TMBLOG system  as case study . 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
   In order to retrieve  relevant information , internal s earch engines are commonly used 
to navigate through index datab ases of posting management systems ( PMS : blogs, 
cooperative plat forms, digital libraries, document versioning tools, etc.). Retrieval 
methods vary from one engine  to another  but are mainly related to the attributes defined 
in each application even if the PMS being searched is based on a simple  index database  
(related to the posted data) , augmented (index with hierarchical meta data) database, or 
multiple/integrated index  database s. For instance , in library indexing  (e.g. Bliss , Dewey , 
Goettingen, LC, Ranganathan , Riders , etc.), classifications are done by librarians 
without necessarily understanding the resource (books, documents, reports, etc.) 
contents. The used indexes  are based on standard library attributes and methodologies ; 
conseque ntly, information retrieval is restrict ed because it is limited to attributes without 
considering the content.  Inspired by the model proposed in  [8], our goal is to  integrat e 
topic maps (TM) into the retrieval process in order to  provide relevant and riche r results 
by allowing the user to search outside the known and/or predefined attributes and norms 
of classifications  by including document content. In this paper, we study two issues. The 
first issue is related to TM creation from documents and management of this creation in 
a collaborative environment by integrating six contextual parameters. The second issue 
is connected to the improvement of information retrieval in TMs . We typify the related 
problems with concrete examples in the following sections.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the related work on 
TMs and information retrieval. Section 3 present s our approach and management of 
topic maps  for semantic augmented information.  It also shows  our architecture to Ontology -driven data management with Topic Maps ,  
Frederic Andres , Rajkumar Kannan  
 
improve semantic management using  TMs . Section 4 describe s a case study regarding  
contextual semantic management . Section 5 conclude s this study  and discusses  ongoing 
work.  
II. RELATED  WORK  
Several studies  exist on  multimedia12 data management and retrieval. For insta nce, the 
search engine NIX (NASA Image eXchange: http://nix.nasa.gov) allows users to search 
NASA's online image and photo collections over the web. Retrieval is done on texts 
associated to images  by using Boolean operators. Other famous search engines (li ke Google, 
Altavista, Yahoo !, Amore, and MSN ) use similar methods to search the multimedia content 
of web pages. The main difference s between these engines are in how they automatically 
locate textual descriptors in the web pages according to their positio n and importance to the 
image to be described. The drawbacks of using traditional textual -based methods for 
multimedia retrieval have been identified by the scientific comm unity  and other  users. In 
fact, there are several directions of research attempt ing to extend current methods with 
ontologies and taxonomies to rewrite user queries and improve application results. 
Nevertheless , to the best of our knowledge, no ne of the  existing methods can utilize topic 
maps for semantic augmented information search and retrieval. The major benefit for 
end-users  of being able to do so  would be  access to s eamless knowledge  under ISO standard 
13250.  
Several studies  have used topic map s to visual ize, adapt, and otherwise represent 
information to the user. For instance, the E NWiC  (EduNuggets Wiki Crawler ) project  [1] 
for students provides an interface to wikis “ in order to take advantage of the large 
information repositories ”. It represents the structure of a wiki as a topic map  (automatic 
creation of instances, associations , and topic)  but it only make s use of TMs for adaptation of 
existing database s. Krötzsch et al. ’s work  [2] on Wikipedia claimed that information 
searching in Wikipedia was primitive. Although the ir solution used semantic technology, it 
goes without saying th at imposing semantic technology on an already existing information 
base will not achieve much without initially considering  the underlying information. An 
approach to annotation  of the Wikipedia  website  is provided in  reference  [13]. It consists of 
creatin g a layer of information on the existing information that does not directly affect the 
structure or content of the existing information.  In a related work, the KendraBase projec t 
[14] was conceived to enable  people  with divers e ideas  to collaborat e for knowledge 
 
1 In this section, w e cite examples from information management in multimedia database s, blogs , and 
wikis because this sort of information management  is compar able to information management using 
topic maps  (i.e., we are not attempting to  draw a border line between these terminologies ).  
 
2 We use the word multimedia to describe doc uments including several data types such as text, 
audio, video , and image.  
 
creation. The project  was intended to be “a semantic wiki / database with auto form 
generation for data input and queries”.  The Edunuggets project  [5] considered how to  
provide a personalized knowledge repository in a learning environment .. In refer ences  [1, 
8], the overall objective was to support on -line teaching and learning by: (a) providing a 
means to evaluate and annotate available information, (b) providing a context for the 
organization of the available information, and (c) supporting learner s’ access. The ir work 
was a way of reorganiz ing and “repack ing” existing information.  The approach of the 
System for Universal Media Searching (SUMS) is not just limited to the organization of the 
information base ; it extends  to “reorganization” of the inf ormation base according to  the 
user’s knowledge. SUMS is a tool for finding, retrieving , and organizing material on the 
Internet aiming at linking personal local collection s of facts with the external electronic 
world [1 0]. In “Towards a Semantic Web for C ulture” , Prof. Kim Veltman asserted that 
“Culture is about both objects and the commentaries on them; about a cumulative body of 
knowledge; about collective memory and heritage. … In this context, the science of meaning 
(semantics) is necessarily much more  complex than semantic primitives”.  
For all these reasons and for efficient enhanced information retrieval, we believe that 
there is need to combine information creation and information search for a specific objective 
in a collaborative environment.   
 
III. SEMANTIC AUGMENTED INFORMATION MANAGEMENT  
The usage of TMBLOG [8] has pointed out an innovative layer  based on topic maps to 
enrich multimedia posting s with metadata and to extract semantic  spatial -temporal 
semantics from those postings . Topic maps provide a  new kind of semantic  structure for 
spatial -temporal postings storage, navigation , and visualization.  However, the topic map 
management including contextual semantic support influences  the efficiency of the retrieved 
information. Let us review the related issues.  
A. Topic Maps Management Issues  
Two issues need to be considered in order to manage semantic augmented information  
efficiently  in topic maps : 
 The automatic creation phase of topic maps according to the document s’ structure and 
content ”; 
 The enhancemen t of topic maps toward their usages as topic maps are sets of subject 
proxies;  
Table 1: Scenario of information search in a Topic Map 
 
 
 
 
The basis of enhanced  information retrieval  in topic maps  is the creator  point of view  
regarding the target document s. Table 1 introduce s a possible search scenario associated 
with the type of information that can be derived in TMs . The scenario assume s that there is 
no subclass in the three parameters. In essence , we want to show that the analysis of 
information built on  three parameters will necessarily entail  inter-parameter , intra -parameter  
and subclass analysis  to improve the search using topic maps . Let us consider the following 
example  wherein  a topic map  on D documents  is created in an institution by N employees 
over a period of T years. Suppose first that a user produce s only one topic map  per year from  
only one document. Over the  period of five years (T=5), the user will have created  five topic 
maps and thus the N employees  will have  5xN topic map s. In contrast, i f all the employees 
can make one  topic map  on each of 1000 documents per year, there will be  (5x1000)  x N 
topic map s after five years . Now, if the topic map s are not restrained by the number of time s, 
by the number of creators , or by the number of document s involved, the situation becomes 
very complex (NxTxD potential topics maps) particularly when all these parameters values 
are high.  The problem that readily comes to mind is how to manage the large number of topic 
maps .  
Having presented the key issues as sociated with the creation and managemen t of topic 
maps , we now present our approach regarding contextual topic maps  and our related 
architecture  to handle them . 
B. Architecture and Contextual Topic Maps  Issues  
 
Our approach consists of integrating several pa rameters that will reflect not just the 
organization of information but the content to permit comprehensive access to information 
in contextual topic maps . The a nalysis proposed in reference [9] is still possible in the 
context of TM usage. Figure 1 presen ts an overview of the interactions of the constituents 
 
involved in topic map  creation and subsequent topic –related information search es. The 
information system consists of document s, topic map s, and semantic databases. Below , we 
will not discuss  the conten t of these databases but only their relative us age. 
The functional architecture  is composed of two tasks : 
 The creation task 
 The topic maps  search task.  
In the first task, the user create s a topic map from  a document. The retrieved document 
can include topic maps previous ly created from other documents. The retrieved documents ’ 
content  becomes the  subject s of the user’s topic maps . The topics are analyzed by the topic 
analyzer  shown  in Figure 1. When this is done, the local topic maps  are sent to the topic 
maps storage  with reference s to the semantic database  [“with reference to  the semantic 
database ” is grammatical but I ’m not sure what it refers to in the sentence. For instance, 
“When this is done  with reference to  the semantic database ”, “the local topic maps  with 
reference to  the semantic database ”, “are sent with reference to  the semantic database ”, or 
“the topic maps storage  with reference to  the semantic database .”]. The semantic database 
itself may be a creation from  previous topic map  sessions . Note that the user’s topic maps  
must fulfill all the contextual parameters (detailed in the following sections) . User s must also 
supply one or more descriptive subject s to each of these parameters.   
 
Fig.1.  Functional architecture  
The topic mapper directly re lates the search terms of the users with in the topic maps . 
Users  can search using any of the concepts they are  familiar with from the list coming from 
the topic maps . 
 
IV. CASE  STUDY  OF TMBLOG  
A. Resource algebra   
The resource algebra enables various  users to shar e their documents as part of a 
collaborative platform  such as a blog. Resource semantic type and functions in the TMs are 
directly represented using the appropriate data type and functions supported by the resource 
algebra. This algebra has two targets. Fi rst, it is a semantic interface between scientis ts who 
are able to reduce the semantic gap and to strength the metadata bridging them.  Second, it 
facilitates a “collaborative intersection” of scientists using TMs integrating high -level 
semantics. Let us recall the notion of many sorted algebra [ 5]. Such algebra consists of 
several sets of values and a set of operations (functions) between these sets. It consists of two 
sets of symbols called sorts (e.g. topic, pdf, rtf, lsi_sm) and operators (e.g. tm_transc ribe, 
semantic_similarity); the function sections constitute the signature of the algebra. The 
second order signature  is based on two coupled many -sorted signatures where the top -level 
signature provides kinds (set of types) as sorts (e.g. DATA, RESOURCE, 
SEMANTIC_DATA) and type constructors as operators (e.g. set). To illustrate the 
approach, we assume the following simplified many -sorted algebra:  
 
Kinds  DATA, RESOURCE, SEMANTIC_DATA, TOPIC_MAPS, SET  
Type  constructor  
  -> DATA       topic  
  -> RESOURCE   pdf, rdt, htm, xml, cvs, jpeg, tiff   // resource doc ument type  
  -> SEMANTIC_DATA  lsi_sm, mpeg7_sm, dc_sm, vra_sm, cdwa_sm,  
ecai_sm, objectid_sm  //  Semantic and metadata ve ctors 
  -> TM             tm(topic maps)  
 
TM ->SET       set 
 
Unary operations  
 
 ∀resource in RESOURCE,  
 resource → sm: SEMANTIC_DATA,tm  tm_transcribe  
 ∀ sm in SEMANTIC_DATA  sm → set(tm)   sema ntic_similarity  
 
The notion sm:SEMANTIC_DATA is to be read as “some type sm in 
SEMA NTIC_DATA,” and it means there is a typing mapping associat ed with the 
tm_transcribe operator. Each operator determines the result type within the kind of 
SEMA NTIC_DATA depending on the given operand resource types.  
 
Binary operations  
 
∀ tm in TOPIC_MAPS,  (tm )+ → tm    topicmaps_merging  
 
 
∀ sm in SEMANTIC_DATA ,  ∀ tm in TOPIC_MAPS,   
sm,tm  tm → tm      semantic_merging   
 
∀ topic in DATA, ∀tm in TOPIC_MAPS,  
      set(tm) x (topic → bool) → set(tm )    select  
 
The semantic merging operation takes two or more operands that are all TM values. The 
select statement tak es an operand type set (tm) and a predicate of the type topic as input and 
returns a subset of the operand set fulfilling the predicate. From the implementation point of 
view, the resource algebra is an extensible library package providing a co llection of resource 
data types and operations for domain -oriented resource computation (e.g. cultural field).  
The most important concepts in blog management according to [ 6] are postings access and 
postings management. Although postings management has been regarded as organizing 
postings “constituent s” (such as information type s), we believe that an organization of 
postings content can facilitate retrieval. Postings search es can be based on one algorithm or 
the other. The applicability of algorithms used for postings  search es depends on  the content 
of the information base or on the organization of the underlying information base.   
V. CONCLUSION  
The above proposal can greatly improve the specificity of information creation and 
information research and thereby improv e the access rate. We show ed how a topic map can 
be created bearing in mind its usage in “enhanced information retrieval”. We proposed a 
contextual  query  methodology based on topic maps . The next step of this work is on 
combining TMBLOG with a collaborative rese arch project on a semantic tracking platform 
[15].  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT S 
The research presented in this paper would not have been possible without the su pport and 
advise of respected professors and colleagues at the National I nstitute of Informatics 
(Japan) . The authors would like to thank NII for providing the necessary r esources to carry 
out this research.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1] Espiritu C., Stroulia E., and Tirapat T., ENWiC: Visualizing WIKI semantics as Topic 
Maps: An automated topic discovery and visualization tool, I n Proceedings of the 8th 
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems 23 - 27, May 2006, Paphos 
pp. 35 -42  URL:http://www.cs.ualberta.ca/~stroulia/ EduNuggets/enwic -iceis2006.pdf  
[2] Krötzsch M . Vrandečic D . and Völkel M ., Wikipedia and the Semantic Web: The 
missing Links, Proceedings of Wikimania , Frankfurt, Germany , 2005 . 
url:http://www.aifb.uni -karlsruhe.de/WBS/mak/ pub/wikimania.pdf  
 
[3] Güting, R. H. , Gral: an extensible relational database system for geometric applications. 
In Proceedings of the 15th international Conference on Very Large Data Bases 
(Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Very Large Data Bases. Morgan Kaufmann P ublishers, 
San Francisco, CA, pp. 33-44, 1989.  
[4] Haase, K. , Context for semantic metadata. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual ACM 
international Conference on Multimedia  (New York, NY, USA, October 10 - 16, 2004). 
MULTIMEDIA '04. ACM Press, New York, NY, pp. 204-211, 2004.  
[5] Jari K., and Stroulia E., EduNuggets: an intelligent environment for managing and 
delivering multimedia education content, In Proceedings of the 8th international 
conference on Intelligent user interfaces, Miami, Florida, USA, pp . 303-306, 2003, 
ISBN:1 -58113 -586-6, ACM Press.  
[6] Le Grand B ., and Soto M., Visualisation of the Semantic Web: Topic Maps 
Visualisation, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information 
Visualisation (IV’02), 2002 . 
[7] Naito, M., and Andres, F., Application F ramework Based on Topic Maps, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, Volume 3873, Feb 2006, pp. 42-52, DOI 
10.1007/11676904_4, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11676904_4 Charting the Topic 
Maps Research and Applications Landscape: First International Workshop on  Topic 
Map Research and Applications, TMRA 2005, Leipzig, Germany, October 6 -7, 2005, 
Revised Selected Papers Editors: Lutz Maicher, Jack Park ISBN: 3 -540-32527 -1. 
[8] Rajbhandari, S., Andres, F., Naito, M., and Wuwongse, V., Semantic -augmented 
support in Spat ial-Temporal Multimedia Blog Management, the International 
Conference on Topic Maps Research and Applications (TMRA 2006), Leipzig, 
Germany, October 11 -12, 2006, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Revised 
selected papers  (LNAI4438), Leveraging the S emantics of Topic Maps, pp.  215-226, 
ISSN 0302 -9743, ISBN 978 -3-540-71944 -1.  
[9] Rath Holger H ., The Topic Maps Handbook, Empolis Arvato Knowledge Management, 
Gütersloh, Germany, 2003  
[10] Veltman Kim H., Towards a Semantic Web for Culture, Journal of Digital Information , 
Volume 4 , Issue 4 , 2004 . 
[11] Veltman Kim H., 1995, Electronic Media in the Study of Alberti, Congrès International 
Leon Battista Alberti , Paris, 1995.  
http://www.mmi.unimaas.nl/people/Veltman/veltmanarticles/1995%20Electronic%20
Media%20in%20the%20Study%20of%20Alberti.pdf   
[12] Topic M aps: http://www.topicmaps.org/xtm/  
[13] Semantic Wiki Wiki Web: http://www.c2.com/cgi/wiki?SemanticWikiWikiWeb  
[14] KendraBase  : http://www.kendra.org.uk/wiki/wiki.pl?KendraBase  
[15] Kawtrakul, A., Permpool, T., Yingsaeree, C., and Andres, F., A Framework of NLP 
based Information Tracking and related Knowledge Organizing with Topic Maps, in Z. 
Kedad et al. (Eds): NLDB2007, LNCS No. 4592 Natural Language Processing and 
Information Syste ms, Springer -Verlag, pp.  272-283, ISBN 978 -3-540-73350 -8, 12th 
 
International Conference on Applications of Natural Language to Information Systems 
(NLDB 2007), June 27 -29, 2007, CNAM, Paris, France . 
[16] Kannan R., Andres F., and Guetl C., DanVideo: an MPEG -7 authoring and retrieval 
system for dance videos, Multimedia Tools and Applications, Springer Netherlands, 
ISSN 1380 -7501, 10.1007/s11042 -009-0388 -3, pp.545 -572, october, 2009.  
 
