HAL Id: hal-01089102
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01089102
Submitted on 1 Dec 2014
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in F rance or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
T oward an Ontology-Based Chatbot Endowed with
Natural Language Processing and Generation
Amine Hallili
T o cite this version:
Amine Hallili. T oward an Ontology-Based Chatbot Endowed with Natural Language Processing and
Generation. 26th European Summer School in Logic, Language & Information, Aug 2014, Tübingen,
Germany . ￿hal-01089102￿
T o w ard an On tology-Based Chatb ot Endo w ed
with Natural Language Pro cessing and
Generation
Amine Hallili
Univ. Nice Sophia An tip olis, CNRS, I3S, UMR 7271, 06900 Sophia An tip olis, F rance
hallili@i3s.unice.fr
Abstract. With the last ev olution of the w eb, sev eral new means of
comm unication ha v e sho w ed up. In the commercial domain, c hatb ot tec h-
nologies are no w considered as essen tial for pro viding a wide range of ser-
vices (e.g. searc h, F A Q, assistance) to the end-user, and to mak e a clien t
a faithful customer. In this pap er, w e prop ose an on-going w ork on the
denition and implemen tation of Sync hroBot, an on tology-based c hat-
b ot that relies on Seman tic W eb and NLP mo dels and tec hnologies to
supp ort user-mac hine dialogical in teraction in the e-commerce domain.
Keyw ords: Chatb ot, Articial In telligence, Natural Language Pro cess-
ing, Natural Language Generation, Seman tic W eb
1 In tro duction
During the last decades, our w a y of consuming information has totally c hanged
with the emergence of new means of comm unication (e.g. forums, F A Q, so cial
net w orks, seman tic searc h engines, mobile applications, and text to sp eec h sys-
tems) whic h pro vide us with dieren t p ossibilities of handling and dealing with
information on the w eb. A t the same time, researc hers in Natural Language
Pro cessing (NLP) and Seman tic W eb domains ha v e prop osed new approac hes to
mo del and implemen t more and more complex systems capable of in terpreting
natural language, of reasoning, and of assisting end-users (e.g. Chatb ots [1], Ex-
p ert Systems [10] , m ulti agen t systems [15], and Question Answ ering systems
[9]). Besides co v ering b oth op en and close domains (e.g. so cial, commercial, sci-
en tic), suc h systems aim to b e autonomous, self-learning and they can replace
h umans in p erforming sev eral tasks. My PhD researc h prop osal, whose prelimi-
nary w orks I presen t in this pap er, fo cuses on c hatb ot systems, whic h w e classify
in t w o dieren t categories: Question Answ ering Systems (QA) and Dialog Sys-
tems (DS). On the one hand, Question Answ ering systems aim at nding answ ers
to factual queries in either a Kno wledge Base (KB) or ra w text and to return
them to the user. The answ er can b e just a textual string (e.g. [4]) or it can
b e enric hed b y other meta-information or w ell-formed sen tences, obtained b y
applying Natural Language Generation (NLG) tec hniques (e.g. [2,5]). In spite
of their eciency in retrieving the information, suc h systems lac k the capabil-
it y of handling the links b et w een sequen tial questions as in a con v ersation. On
the other hand, Dialog Systems aim at k eeping in memory the links b et w een
consecutiv e questions in order to ensure a logical con v ersation mo de with the
user (e.g. [13,7]). Nev ertheless, most of these systems do not rely on robust and
exible KBs allo wing them to extract information from m ultiple sources and to
reason o v er the data. The goal of our w ork is to com bine the strengh ts of the t w o
categories of systems discussed ab o v e, and to prop ose a dialog system that relies
on i) a ric h KB for data extraction and reasoning, ii) NLP to ols to in terpret
user ' s question, and iii) NLG tec hniques to generate w ell-formed sen tences. The
system will ensure the follo wing t yp e of con v ersation:
<User> Give me the pric e of a Nexus 5!
<System> the pric e of Nexus 5 is 400$
<User> and who sel ls it?
<System> sever al sel lers wer e found. The main one is Go o gle!
Do you want to se e other sel lers?
<User> No, show me the white version, sold by Go o gle and
lo c ate d in F r anc e!
<System> her e ar e the images of Nexus 5 white version, sold by
Go o gle and lo c ate d in F r anc e...
The remainder of this pap er is organized as follo w: Section 2 presen ts our
preliminary approac h and implemen tation. In Section 3 w e describ e our ongoing
w orks along with our p ersp ectiv es for future w orks.
2 Sync hroBot : A Preliminary Approac h
The approac h w e prop ose relies on the Seman tic W eb1paradigm, whic h co v ers
structuring, linking, sharing and reusing data through applications, en terprises
and comm unities. F or that, it pro vides a n um b er of information mo deling frame-
w orks e.g. Resource Description F ramew ork (RDF) and RDF Sc hema (RDFS).
The preliminary approac h w e prop ose here to w ard an on tology-based c hatb ot
co v ers three asp ects, namely i) Kno wledge based System ii) Question In terpre-
tation iii) Natural Language Generation. Curren tly w e fo cus on mo deling and
implemen ting an ecien t and robust QA system that will b e the corner stone
for our future Dialog System.
2.1 A Kno wledge Based System
Our approac h relies on the use of exiting to ols, resources and information (e.g.
F A Q, API, system logs) in order to create a KB in RDF, whic h means that the
data will b e represen ted as triples: <Subject, property, Value> . F or exam-
ple, the follo wing sen tence Go ogle sells Nexus 5 can b e expressed in RDF as
<sbr:Google, sbo:sells, sbr:Nexus_5> . W e ha v e created an on tology that
1www.w3.org/2001/sw/
describ es the classes (e.g. Pro duct, Category , Seller, etc.) and prop erties (e.g.
sells, price, lo catedIn, etc.) of the KB in the e-commerce domain (the fo cus of
Sync hrob ot). F or instance Go ogle t yp e is sbo:Seller and has the sbo:sells
prop ert y . Lik ewise, Nexus_5 ' s t yp e is
sbo:Product and has the sbo:locatedIn prop ert y . Also, with our on tology w e
infer, among others, that Nexus 5 is sold b y Go ogle ( <sbr:Nexus_5 , sbo:soldBy ,
sbr:Google> ). F urthermore, ev ery prop ert y is annotated in b oth F renc h and En-
glish, b y a n um b er of lab els that ha v e the same meaning (e.g. sbo:sells will
ha v e sell, trade, v end, commercialize, mark et, etc. as lab els), whic h will
b e used to matc h the terms in the question, in order to iden tify the queried prop-
ert y . The curren t v ersion of the KB is comp osed of 500000 pro duct descriptions
that w e retriev ed b y using eBa y APIs to transform eBa y data to RDF.
2.2 Question In terpretation
As regards the natural language question in terpretation, our approac h fo cuses
on textual information as input and relies on the w ork describ ed in [3] whic h
requires iden tifying three asp ects i) the Exp ected Answ er T yp e (EA T), whic h is
the t yp e of the resource that w e are lo oking for, ii) the prop ert y , represen ting
the relation linking the en tit y on whic h the question is ask ed to its answ er, and
iii) the Named En tit y (NE) represen ting the sub ject of the giv en question. In
this example Who sells Nexus 5?, the EA T is sbo:Seller , the prop ert y is
sbo:sells and the NE is sbr:Nexus_5 .
Named En tit y Recognition : T o iden tify the NE, w e aim at using natural
language pro cessing tec hniques (e.g. Named En tit y detection and linking) to
retriev e all p ossible NEs from the KB b y matc hing the user ' question to KB
prop ert y v alues (e.g. name, description, etc.). Then, relev an t NEs will b e used in
querying the KB according to the assigned retrieving score whic h w e determine
b y using the folo wing strategy :
In order to assign a score to the qualit y of the searc h, our strategy relies
on sev eral asp ects : First, all KB prop erties used for the searc h are ordered de-
p ending on their relev ance. F or instance, matc hing the user ' s question to the
sbo:hasLegalName prop ert y will b e more accurate than matc hing it to the
sbo:hasDescription prop ert y and so on. Based on that, a relev ance co e-
cien t is assigned to eac h prop ert y and used in b oth the score computing and the
determination of relev an t NEs. Second, a score is assigned to the accuracy of
the matc hing of the user's question and the resources found in the KB. In other
w ord, the bigger the matc hed w ords, the higher score will b e (an exact matc h will
result of a p erfect score and the found resource will b e directly used). Finally ,
w e fo cus on the n um b er of the retriev ed resources to determine the precision of
our result. This means that the few er resources w e nd, the higher the precision
of the searc h.
Prop ert y Detection : W e detect the prop ert y b y matc hing its annotated
lab els with the user ' s question [6] and follo wing a scoring strategy w e pic k up
the relev an t prop ert y .
W e are also able to recognize questions with t w o relations as sho wn b elo w in
gure 1. F or instance, the follo wing example Giv e me the address of the Nexus
5 ' s sellers! con tains t w o prop erties (i.e. sbo:address , sbo:sells ) meaning that
the question can b e divided in t w o sub-questions: Giv e me the Nexus 5 ' s sell-
ers! and Giv e me their addresses!. This can b e done thanks to the fact that the
prop erties in our on tology ha v e domain and range that allo w the detection of 2-
relation (n-relations in general). Concretely w e aim at constructing a relational
graph represen ting the user ' s question that con tains the iden tied prop erties
along with the found resources (e.g. Named En tities), while comparing b oth the
NE t yp e and the iden tied prop ert y domain. In the giv en example, the prop ert y
sbo:address , with domain sbo:Seller , will ha v e the b est score along with the
NE sbr:Nexus_5 that ha v e t yp e sbo:Product whic h diers from sbo:Seller ,
this leads to the creatation of a relational graph with t w o no des whic h are t w o
prop erties namely sbo:address and sbo:soldBy and means that the question
has more than one relation. These elemen ts (NE, prop ert y and EA T) will b e
used to generate a SP AR QL query that retriev es results from the KB.
Note that the system will select the prop ert y sbo:soldBy instead of sbo:sells
during the pro cess time. This is due to the fact that the system will use inference
to pic k up more prop erties to b e able to construct a relational graph that rep-
resen ts the user ' s questio. In our example, only the sbo:soldBy prop ert y whic h
is the in v ersed prop ert y of the selected one sbo:sells will giv e results when
creating the relational graph.
Fig. 1. Relational graph for 2 relations
Exp ected Answ er T yp e (EA T) Detection : After detecting relev an t
prop erties, w e aim at using their resp ectiv e Domain t yp es. F or instance, as
sho wn in gure 1, the follo wing prop erties' Domains ( sbo:Product , sbo:Seller ,
sbo:Address ) will b e used along with the score assigned to their resp ectiv e
prop ert y . This allo ws us to sort all the detected EA T s b efore adding them in the
generated query that the system use to retriev e results from the KB.
2.3 Natural Language Generation
In order to answ er questions with a generated sen tence, w e prop ose that eac h
prop ert y in our on tology will b e mapp ed with a list of generic resp onse pat-
terns. Our c hallenge is to b e able to replace dynamically some particular parts
of the pattern to return w ell-formed answ ers. F or instance, w e tak e the example
Giv e me the price of a Nexus 5! and considering that the iden tied prop ert y
sbo:price matc hes the pattern [ The pric e of {Pr o duct} is {V alue} ] , so after
replacing the {Pro duct} and {V alue} parts w e can answ er that The price of
Nexus 5 is 400$. W e also use the sbo:mediaType prop ert y to sho w more in ter-
esting information to the user after giving the w ell-formed answ er (e.g. image,
video, map, etc.). F or instance, when a user asks Sho w me the white v ersion of
Nexus 5!, the system infers that the user is more in terested in viewing images
rather than just textual information, and as a result, images will b e displa y ed
in this case.
3 Ongoing and F uture W ork
This pap er sk etc hes out the PhD researc h pro ject I ha v e recen tly started, and
describ es the preliminary steps represen ting the bases of a n um b er of directions
that w e consider for future w ork:
As ongoing and short term w orks w e are planning to impro v e the NE recogni-
tion b y using w ell-kno wn and ecien t algorithms (e.g. KNN, Similarit y , N-Gram
and TF-IDF scoring) in order to gain more precision, to sp ot complex and am-
biguous resources, and to b e able to div ersify giv en answ ers. W e ha v e also b egun
to reuse other famous on tologies that exist in the literature and co v er the com-
mercial domain. w e ha v e started to use the sc hema.org [11] on tology but due to
its parial co v erage, w e ha v e decided to use more sp ecic on tology (Go o dRela-
tions [8] on tology) whic h fully co v ers the commercial domain.
F urthermore, w e consider answ ering n-Relation questions b y the construction of
a Relational Graph represen ting the question ' s NEs and prop erties. F or that,
w e will study the p ossibilit y to generalize the 2-relation question answ ering ap-
proac h explained in the previous section, to n-Relation questions. Moreo v er, w e
in tend to in tegrate the relational pattern matc hing mo dule of QAKiS system [4]
that exploits Wikip edia pages to extract lexicalisations of on tological relations.
More sp ecically , w e will use w ebsite APIs, w eb services [14] and pro duct pages
to automatically extract and create generic prop ert y and resp onse patterns. This
will ensure more precision in detecting prop erties expressed in the user's question
and it will allo w to answ er questions in dieren t w a ys.
As middle term impro v emen ts, w e in tend to fo cus our w ork on the dialog
mo de part that w e will in tegrate on top of our prop osed approac h, so that
w e can prop ose an approac h that ensures our targeted scenario. F or that, w e
will in v estigate the comm unicativ e b eha vior approac hes (e.g. pause, resume, and
to switc h b et w een in teractiv e tasks [13]), dialog managemen t systems (e.g. [7])
and in particular, the on tology-based dialog systems (e.g. [12] whic h corresp ond
p erfectly to the kind of system that w e w an t to implemen t.
References
1. J. F. Allen, D. K. Byron, M. Dzik o vsk a, G. F erguson, L. Galescu, and A. Sten t.
T o w ard con v ersational h uman-computer in teraction. AI Magazine , 22(4):2738,
2001.
2. A. Augello, G. Pilato, G. V assallo, and S. Gaglio. A seman tic la y er on semi-
structured data sources for in tuitiv e c hatb ots. In CISIS , pages 760765, 2009.
3. E. Cabrio, J. Co jan, A. P . Aprosio, B. Magnini, A. La v elli, and F. Gandon. Qakis:
an op en domain qa system based on relational patterns. In International Semantic
W eb Confer enc e (Posters & Demos) , 2012.
4. E. Cabrio, J. Co jan, A. P almero Aprosio, and F. Gandon. Natural language in-
teraction with the w eb of data b y mining its textual side. Intel ligenza A rticiale ,
6(2):121133, 2012.
5. J. Chai, V. Horv ath, N. Nicolo v, M. St ys, A. Kam bhatla, W. Zadrozn y , and
P . Melville. Natural language assistan t: A dialog system for online pro duct recom-
mendation. AI Magazine , 23:6375, 2002.
6. D. Damljano vic, M. Agatono vic, and H. Cunningham. Natural language in terfaces
to on tologies: Com bining syn tactic analysis and on tology-based lo okup through the
user in teraction. In ESW C (1) , pages 106120, 2010.
7. T. Heinroth and D. Denic h. Sp ok en in teraction within the computed w orld: Ev al-
uation of a m ultitasking adaptiv e sp ok en dialogue system. In COMPSA C , pages
134143, 2011.
8. M. Hepp. Go o drelations: An on tology for describing pro ducts and services oers
on the w eb. In EKA W , pages 329346, 2008.
9. L. Hirsc hman and R. J. Gaizausk as. Natural language question answ ering: the
view from here. Natur al L anguage Engine ering , 7(4):275300, 2001.
10. S.-H. Liao. Exp ert system metho dologies and applications - a decade review from
1995 to 2004. Exp ert Syst. Appl. , 28(1):93103, 2005.
11. P . Mik a and T. P otter. Metadata statistics for a large w eb corpus. In LDO W ,
2012.
12. D. Milw ard and et al. On tology-based dialogue systems, 2003.
13. B. P akucs. T o w ards dynamic m ulti-domain dialogue pro cessing. In INTER-
SPEECH , 2003.
14. D. Sonn tag, R. Engel, G. Herzog, A. Pfalzgraf, N. Peger, M. Romanelli, and N. Re-
ithinger. Smart w eb handheld - m ultimo dal in teraction with on tological kno wledge
bases and seman tic w eb services. In A rtic al Intel ligenc e for Human Computing ,
pages 272295, 2007.
15. M. J. W o oldridge. A n Intr o duction to MultiA gent Systems (2. e d.) . Wiley , 2009.
