See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/233864602
User experience - A research agenda
Article    in  Behaviour and Inf ormation T echnolog y · Mar ch 2006
DOI: 10.1080/01449290500330331  · Sour ce: DBLP
CITATIONS
2,649READS
32,821
2 author s, including:
Mar c Hassenz ahl
Univ ersität Sie gen
285 PUBLICA TIONS    17,634  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Mar c Hassenz ahl on 04 June 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
User experience – a research agenda
MARC HASSENZAHL* {and NOAM TRACTINSKY** {
{Darmstadt University of Technology, Department of Psychology, Social Psychology and
Decision-Making, Darmstadt, Germany
{Information Systems Engineering, Ben-Gurion University, Israel
Over the last decade, ‘user experience’ (UX) became a buzzword in the ﬁeld of human –
computer interaction (HCI) and interaction design. As technology matured, interactive
products became not only more useful and usable, but also fashionable, fascinating things todesire. Driven by the impression that a narrow focus on interactive products as tools does notcapture the variety and emerging aspects of technology use, practitioners and researchersalike, seem to readily embrace the notion of UX as a viable alternative to traditional HCI.And, indeed, the term promises change and a fresh look, without being too speciﬁc about its
deﬁnite meaning. The present introduction to t he special issue on ‘Empirical studies of the
user experience’ attempts to give a provisional answer to the question of what ismeant by ‘the
user experience’. It provides a cursory sketch of UX and how we think UX research will looklike in the future. It is not so much meant as a forecast of the future, but as a proposal – astimulus for further UX research.
1. Introduction
User experience (UX) is a strange phenomenon: readily
adopted by the human – computer interaction (HCI)community – practitioners and researchers alike – and atthe same time critiqued repeatedly for being vague, elusive,ephemeral. The term ‘user experience’ is associated with a
wide variety of meanings (Forlizzi and Battarbee 2004),
ranging from traditional usability to beauty, hedonic,aﬀective or experiential aspects of technology use.
UX has gained momentum in recent years, mostly as a
countermovement to the dominant, task- and work-related‘usability’ paradigm. Ideas represented by UX are im-portant, but by no means original. Early writings onusability already expressed the notion that manifestations
of usability such as productivity or learnability are not
primary. Primary is the person’s experience at the momentexperienced (Whiteside and Wixon 1987). Or considerCarroll and Thomas (1988), who close their article on‘fun’ with:
‘We realize that many people will read this article as a
joke. To this extent, we are the victims of our ownanalysis: there are risks in being serious about fun. Still
though, we continue to see, without humor, the prospectof a decade of research analysis possibly failing toprovide the leverage it could on designing systemspeople will really want to use by ignoring what could bea very potent determinant of subjective judgments ofusability – fun’ (p. 23).
It indeed took the ﬁeld about a decade to absorb those
ideas. Consequently, ﬁrst writings on aspects of UX weremainly programmatic (e.g. Alben 1996, Hassenzahl et al.
2001, Overbeeke et al. 2002), aimed at convincing the HCI
community to take issues beyond the task-related moreseriously. Gradually, this literature has been replaced bymore conceptual papers (e.g. Hassenzahl 2003, Wright et al.
2003; see Forlizzi and Battarbee 2004, for a recent
overview). These papers tried to establish a commonground, a shared view of what constitutes a ‘good’ userexperience. But even now, while UX is well discussedon conferences and symposia, it only rarely enters therelevant academic journals. We believe that the lack ofempirical research is one of the reasons for this. Theabsence of empirical research – whether qualitative or
Corresponding author. Email: *hassenzahl@psychologie.tu-darmstadt.de; **noamt@bgu.ac.ilBehaviour & Information Technology , Vol. 25, No. 2, March-April 2006, 91 – 97
Behaviour & Information Technology
ISSN 0144-929X print/ISSN 1362-3001 online ª2006 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/01449290500330331
quantitative – impedes theoretical advancement and
restricts our understanding of UX as concept and itsfurther development.
The present special issue on ‘Empirical studies of the user
experience’ is meant as a contribution to the limited body
of empirical work on UX. Our objective was to collect aseries of original, high-quality empirical papers on various(mainly positive) aspects that go beyond the purelycognitive and task-oriented. This request was well receivedby the community. All in all, 28 manuscripts weresubmitted for review. Thirty-nine expert reviewers assessedthe manuscripts. Our emphasis as editors was not only on
the quality of the papers, but also on the diversity of the
resulting collection. We set out to demonstrate the richnessof UX research, the diversity of topics, approaches andresults.
The ﬁnal issue contains seven papers. Kil-Soo Suh and
Sunjhe Chang (this issue) demonstrate how a technology(i.e. virtual reality) leads to a particular experience (i.e.telepresence), which mediates knowledge, attitudes, pur-
chase intentions and perceptions of product risk. In the
paper ‘Attention web designers: You have 50 millisecondsto make a good ﬁrst impression!’ (this issue), GitteLindgaard, Gary Fernandez, Cathy Dudek and JudyBrown show how fast impressions of the visual appeal ofa website are formed and how stable they are. Mark Blythe,Josephine Reid, Peter Wright and Erik Geelhoed (thisissue) take an interdisciplinary approach to the empirical
study of UX. Their analysis of Riot!, a location-sensitive
interactive play, not only gives interesting insights into themechanics, problems and beneﬁts of such a new technol-ogy, it also reveals the way diﬀerent conceptual andmethodological approaches lead to diﬀerent perspectives,which strongly beneﬁt from each other. This article alsodemonstrates the potential mismatch between designers’intentions and users’ actual experiences. A group of papers
emphasises methods and tools: Regan Mandryk, Kori
Inkpen and Thomas Calvert (this issue) focus on usingphysiological measures to study the UX with entertainmenttechnologies. With ‘aﬀectemes and allaﬀects’, LesleyAxelrod and Kate Hone (this issue) suggest and test anovel approach to coding emotional expression duringexperiences with technology. Ann Light (this issue) focuseson interviewing techniques to gather insights into the
experiential. Finally, Marian Petre, Shaily Minocha and
Dave Roberts (this issue) transfer UX to the ﬁeld anddemonstrate how a more holistic understanding of qualityin the context of business-to-consumer extends or altersestablished tools and techniques.
We hope the present issue will encourage scientists and
practitioners to engage in empirical UX research and bythat to advance our understanding of UX. It is meant as
another starting point for rich research practices. But what
are promising topics to study beyond those alreadyaddressed? Is there a ‘research agenda’ for UX? In the
remainder of this editorial, we attempt to provide a cursorysketch of how wethink UX research will look like in the
future. Our view is not meant to be an accurate forecast.
Rather, we intend it to be a proposal – a stimulus for
further UX research.
A glance at the literature on UX, such as the ‘Design and
Emotion’ conferences (e.g. McDonagh et al . 2003), the
‘Funology’ workshops and publications (Blythe 2003,Blythe et al. 2004), Helander and Tham’s (2003) special
issue on ‘Hedonomics’, the emerging literature on ‘Aes-thetics’ (e.g. Tractinsky in press), or the work of Pat Jordan
(e.g. Jordan 2000) and – recently – Don Norman (2004a),
reveals three major perspectives. One thread predominantlydeals with addressing human needs beyond the instru-mental; a second thread stresses aﬀective and emotionalaspects of the interaction; and a third thread deals with thenature of experience. Let us brieﬂy discuss each perspective(see Hassenzahl in press, for a further overview) and themost interesting related research questions.
2. Beyond the instrumental
Since its early days, HCI research focused almost exclu-
sively on the achievement of behavioural goals in worksettings. The task became the pivotal point of user-centred
analysis and evaluation techniques (e.g. usability testing).To ensure the interactive product’s instrumental value
became the major endeavour of the ﬁeld.
However, this narrow focus on the instrumental was
repeatedly challenged. In an early attempt to deﬁne UX,Alben (1996), for example, identiﬁed beauty (i.e. aesthetics)as an important quality aspect of technology (see Hassen-zahl 2004b, Lavie and Tractinsky 2004). Beauty clearlygoes beyond the instrumental. It becomes importantbecause of its intrinsic value (Postrel 2002), which echoes
the fact that beauty satisﬁes a general human need (Maslow
1954). Beauty is an end rather than a means.
Gaver and Martin (2000) argued for the importance of a
whole range of speciﬁc non-instrumental needs, such assurprise, diversion, or intimacy, to be addressed bytechnology. These ideas begin to disseminate into HCIresearch practice, as demonstrated by faMiliar (Mandic
and Kerne 2005), an addition to email, which visualizes
‘rhythms in social engagements’ (p. 1617). It builds on
intimacy as a core construct (see also Vetere et al. 2005).
Drawing upon the concept of emotional usability (Logan
et al . 1994), Hassenzahl (2003) argued that future HCI
must be concerned about the pragmatic aspects ofinteractive products (i.e. its ﬁt to behavioural goals) aswell as about hedonic aspect, such as stimulation (i.e.personal growth, an increase of knowledge and skills),
identiﬁcation (i.e. self-expression, interaction with relevant
others) and evocation (i.e. self-maintenance, memories).92 M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky
This multidimensional model explicitly links product
attributes with needs and values. A product’s novelty andthe challenges it provides, for example, contribute to itshedonic quality, which is relevant because it promises
fulﬁlment of an underlying human need – a need for being
stimulated, to perfect one’s skills and knowledge, to grow.Such means-end chains (e.g. Gutman 1997) provide insightsinto the ‘meaning’ of products and by that, a betterunderstanding of how to address those meanings by design.
Albeit diﬀerent in detail, all of these approaches have a
common goal: to enrich current models of product qualitywith non-instrumental aspects to create a more complete,
holistic HCI.
What are the challenges of this perspective for future
research? Above all, non-instrumental needs must be betterunderstood, deﬁned and operationalised. How do theytranslate into product quality? Which product attributesare linked to which needs? Based on a better understanding,their interplay and importance can be studied. Perhaps themost intriguing question is how the overall quality or the
‘goodness’ of an interactive product is formed, given
pragmatic and hedonic aspects and underlying needs(Hassenzahl 2004b, Norman 2004b). Are instrumentaland non-instrumental quality perceptions related to eachother, as for example demonstrated for beauty andusability by Tractinsky et al . (2000), or independent of
each other, as shown by Hassenzahl (2002) for hedonic andpragmatic quality aspects? Are needs equally important, do
they form a hierarchy (as suggested by Jordan 2000) or
rather a particular, context-dependent prioritisation (Shel-don et al . 2001), which may change with speciﬁc usage
situations, personal tastes or both? Can we create dynamicquality models, which are able to prescribe an adequateweighting of quality aspects (and the related needs) for agiven product and context of use? How do we design forparticular needs? And ﬁnally: What is the impact of
embedding non-instrumental needs into products in terms
of acceptance, valuation and choice? Tractinsky and Zmiri(in press), for example, showed the choice of personaliseduser interfaces (‘skins’) to be driven by aesthetic andsymbolic considerations. Is this ﬁnding generalisable ordoes it depend on product ‘genre’ (e.g. ‘leisure’ versus‘work’) and usage situation (e.g. ‘social’ versus ‘timepressure’)?
3. Emotion and aﬀect
Current research emphasises the importance of the aﬀective
system for a wide range of central processes, such as humandecision-making (e.g. Loewenstein and Lerner 2003) orsubjective wellbeing (Suh et al . 1996). The ‘Aﬀective
Computing’ project was one of the pioneering attempts to
address aﬀect by HCI (Picard 1997). It called attention to
the importance of aﬀect and emotions. However, aﬀectivecomputing takes a ‘computer’ perspective. It predomi-
nantly deals with questions such as how computers cansense user aﬀect, adapt to it, or even express its ownaﬀective response (see Picard and Klein 2002, Hudlicka
2003). In addition, humans interacting with technology are
depicted as having mostly negative emotions. Conse-quently, aﬀective computing deals with mechanisms thatdetect and undo negative emotions – a substitute for humanand social care and friendship, close to an automatedversion of anger management. For example, Interacting
with Computers ’ Special Issue on Aﬀective Computing
(Cockton 2002) is dominated by illustrations of how
interactive systems can aid irritated users, manage their
frustrations or prevent other negative emotions. In thisparadigm, the researchers envision computerised toys thatare ‘capable of soothing a crying child or of perhapsartiﬁcially preventing strong feelings of loneliness, sadness,frustration, and a host of other strong, negative emotions’(Picard and Klein 2002, p. 23).
Although UX research shares Aﬀective Computing’s
recognition of aﬀect and emotions, it is rather concerned
with aﬀective consequences on the human side than with
technology, which is able to have aﬀect (see Hollnagel 2003,for a critique of Aﬀective Computing). UX takes a ‘human’perspective. It is interested in understanding the role of aﬀectas an antecedent, a consequence and a mediator of technologyuse. In addition, it is rather focused on positive emotions. Toprevent frustration and dissatisfaction had always been a core
objective even of the most cognitively driven perspective on
HCI. What is new in UX research is a focus on positive
emotional outcomes such as joy, fun and pride.
A design example that actually seeks to foster positive
emotional experiences is Gustbowl (van der Hoog et al .
2004), a communication tool designed to connect childrenand parents. Analyses revealed children – parent commu-nication to be predominantly emotional and built on
aﬀective rituals. Both aspects are not supported by the
occasional phone-call, which makes the communicationsometimes awkward and slightly unpleasant, althoughchildren and parents want the contact. Gustbowl is an
actual bowl, maybe placed in the hallway, which transmitspictures of things thrown into it to its counterpart. Theother bowl acknowledges receipt with a wobble and animage of the sender bowl’s content. Gustbowl exploits the
ritual of coming home. A father may have the habit of
depositing his keys, without much thinking, into the bowlwhen coming home. A daughter living apart would receivea slight wobble and a picture of the keys reminding her ofhome, without the need for an explicit act of communica-tion. Gustbowl enables the sending of aﬀective messages in
an implicit, unobtrusive, eﬀortless and continuous way,which blends into day-to-day life.
A second example for an aﬀective requirement addressed
by a technology comes from Millard et al .’s (1999)User experience – a research agenda 93
motivational user interface for call-centre software. Call-
centre agents expressed the need to have an instantoverview of the quality of interaction they had so far withtheir customers. Negative interactions tend to get more
weight in retrospective assessments. Thus, a single negative
interaction can have a signiﬁcant negative impact on anagent’s wellbeing, with no regard whether in fact themajority of interactions had been positive. A common wayto avoid this type of bias is the use of diaries. Based on thisgeneral idea, Millard and colleagues designed moodies ,a
function that allowed collecting an electronic token foreach call, which represents the quality of the interaction
with the customer. This collection enables an agent to
produce an instant, unbiased image of the overall quality ofcustomer interaction during his shift.
Desmet et al . (2001) demonstrated, how aﬀect could
become a design goal. They tried to ﬁt a mobile phone tothe user’s preferred aﬀective response. While all users –naturally – required a positive response, some preferred anexciting phone (i.e. high psychological arousal) while others
preferred a calming phone (i.e. low psychological arousal).
In a gradual process, Desmet and colleagues designed twomobile phone prototypes, which indeed ﬁtted the aﬀectiverequirements of the two diﬀerent groups.
A slightly diﬀerent line of research has it roots in the
Technology Acceptance literature. It studies the interplayand causal links between user perceptions (e.g. perceivedusability) and intention to use or actual behaviour. Zhang
and Li (2004), for example, found the perceived aﬀective
quality of a course management system to be an antecedentof its perceived usability, usefulness and the intention touse. This is in line with previous research (Davis et al. 1992,
Igbaria et al. 1994), which reported an impact of perceived
enjoyment on technology acceptance.
Generally speaking, there are two basic ways in dealing
with emotions in UX (Hassenzahl in press): One line of
research stresses the importance of emotions as conse-
quences of product use (e.g. Kim and Moon 1998, Desmetand Hekkert 2002, Hassenzahl 2003, Tractinsky and Zmiriin press). The other line concentrates on their importanceas antecedents of product use and evaluative judgments(e.g. Singh and Dalal 1999, visceral level in Norman 2004a).
What are the challenges of this perspective for future
research? Obviously, individuals do have aﬀective require-
ments. They must, for example, regulate their moods. This
is especially relevant for emotion work (Hochschild 1990),where the display of aﬀect (e.g. being friendly, being in agood mood) becomes a central part of the job description(e.g. ﬂight attendant, hotel receptionist, call-centre agent).A central question is, how resulting aﬀective requirementscan be collected and translated into concrete products orfunctions as shown by Gustbowl or the motivational
interface? Should technology be a vehicle for aﬀect
maintenance and regulation? Another interesting questionconcerns emotions as design goals. Is it possible to design
emotions? Or are emotions too ephemeral (see Hassenzahl2004a)? In other words, if emotions are a product of manydiﬀerent situational aspects, designers may not have the
ability to exert the amount of control needed for creating
particular emotions. Using an interactive product may notbe comparable to watching a movie in a cinema or visiting atheme park. Thus, designers may settle for establishing thecontext for an emotion rather than the emotion itself. And
further: What are the eﬀects of addressing aﬀect andcreating aﬀective responses on judgements (e.g. liking,willingness-to-pay) and behaviour (e.g. money or time
spent on product, performance). For example, is it possible
to trace the way beauty creates emotions and, moregenerally, the way those emotions inﬂuence judgementand decision-making, both immediately (Lindgaard et al.
this issue) and reﬂectively?
4. The experiential
The experiential perspective on UX emphasizes two aspects
of technology use: its situatedness and its temporality. Inthis view, an experience is a unique combination of variouselements, such as the product and internal states of the user(e.g. mood, expectations, active goals), which extends overtime with a deﬁnitive beginning and end. The experientialassumes all these elements to be interrelated – to interactand modify each other. The outcome of this process is the
actual experience. For example, consider the diﬀerence
between ‘a tomato in one’s fridge’ versus ‘the taste of amarvelous tomato sauce on homemade gnocchi’ or ‘amystery thriller on one’s bookshelf ’ versus ‘being awake allnight because of the thrilling story, which unfolds whilereading’. The product (a tomato, a thriller) is used in aparticular situation, which then forms an experience.
Experiences have advantages. In contrast to material
outcomes (e.g. ‘to experience a concert of one’s favourite
pop star’ versus ‘a new watch’), experiential outcomes havea more positive impact on one’s wellbeing (van Boven andGilovich 2003). They possess aﬀective quality and help totransform and regulate aﬀective states. It seems, thus, agood idea to emphasise the experiential in interactiveproducts rather than the material.
Forlizzi and Batterbee (2004, p. 263) go a step further
and distinguish between ‘An Experience’, which ‘can be
articulated or named, has a beginning and end, [and]inspires behavioural and emotional change’ and ‘Experi-ence’ as ‘a constant stream of ‘‘self-talk’’ that happenswhen we interact with products’. The former acknowledgesthe experiential as complex, unique and thus, outstandingand hard to repeat. The latter view underlines the temporalaspects of experiences, their subjectivity and dynamics.
Both perspectives raise many challenges and interesting
questions. How can we cope with the seeming complexity94 M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky
of experience? Similar to the question about our ability to
design for certain emotions, it is not clear whether we can‘design’ an experience. Can designers exert enough controlover all relevant elements in a way that a positive
experience becomes certain? Or do we rather ‘design for
an experience’, that is, to take experiential aspects intoaccount while designing, without being able to guarantee aparticular experience. Another perspective would acknowl-edge the ubiquity of experiences and rather ask how wecould design products in a way that positive experiences,successes, joy are attributed to the quality of the productrather than to other situational aspects? This perspective
may require UX to break one of the fundamental
assumptions of traditional HCI: interactive products muststep back, be transparent and blend into the context. Agood product is one that performs without being recog-nised. But is it not the aspiration of all designers to gainrecognition for the positive experiences caused by theirproducts?
Another question arises from the ‘experience as stream of
self-talk’ – perspective. How is this stream transformed
into retrospective summary assessments (e.g. Ariely andCarmon 2003)? Such assessments represent an experience.
They have an impact on future experiences. Moreover, theyform the basis for communicating about experiences.Hassenzahl and Sandweg (2004), for example, showedsummary assessments of software’s usability to dependheavily on problems encountered at the endof a usage
episode. This end-eﬀect highlights the diﬀerence between an
experience and retrospective judgements about experiences(see Kahneman 1999, for a thorough discussion of this ideain the context of wellbeing). Judgements about experiencesand the experiences themselves are related, but notidentical.
5. Summary and conclusion
So, what is UX? We took a brief look at three prominent
perspectives. Each perspective contributes a facet to ourunderstanding of users’ interactions with technology, whilesharing some ideas and arguments with the other perspec-tives (see ﬁgure 1).
Thus, none of these perspectives fully captures UX. UX
is about technology that fulﬁls more than just instrumental
needs in a way that acknowledges its use as a subjective,
situated, complex and dynamic encounter. UX is aconsequence of a user’s internal state (predispositions,expectations, needs, motivation, mood, etc.), the character-istics of the designed system (e.g. complexity, purpose,usability, functionality, etc.) and the context (or theenvironment) within which the interaction occurs (e.g.organisational/social setting, meaningfulness of the activ-
ity, voluntariness of use, etc.). Obviously, this creates
innumerable design and experience opportunities.The current strong interest in UX, which encompasses
both practice and research, is not accidental. Manyinteractive products found their way into our daily lives.State-of-the-art machinery (graphics, sound, networks,miniaturisation, etc.) allows for more than mere function-ality. At the same time, the growing and changing base ofusers shifts the parameters of demand for interactiveproducts. The UX perspective takes this shift seriously.
Its focus on aspects beyond the functional, on the positive,
the experiential and emotional is no coincidence. It isdriven by commercial vendors, who are sensitive to thechanges in business climate, by designers who appreciatenew design opportunities, and by a scientiﬁc communitythat shows renewed interest in the aﬀective system and itsinterplay with cognition.
Especially the focus on the positive aspects of technol-
ogy use mirrors a trend in psychology, where Seligman
and Csikszentmihalyi (2000) argued for a new millenniumpsychology to be positive , i.e. to deal with human
strengths and the promotion of wellbeing rather thanwith human weaknesses and healing alone (see alsoKahneman et al . 1999). UX in the sense of a positive
HCI would, thus, focus on how to create outstandingquality experiences rather than merely preventing usability
problems. Again, this will question another implicit
assumption of traditional HCI, one that equates highquality with the absence of problems. This may beanalogous to the notion that absence of illness equalshealth. But just as there is much more to wellbeing thanthe absence of malady, so must there be more to UX thanthe absence of problems. From our perspective, one ofHCI’s main objectives in the future is to contribute to our
quality of life by designing for pleasure rather than for
absence of pain. UX is all about this idea.
Figure 1. Facets of UX.User experience – a research agenda 95
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our supportive expert reviewers:
Carol Barnum, Mark Blythe, Katrin Borcherding, Scott
Brave, Cindy Corritore, Pieter Desmet, BJ Fogg, Jodi
Forlizzi, Bill Gaver, Matthias Go ¨bel, Martin Graﬀ, Kai-
Christoph Hamborg, Jeﬀrey Hancock, Tsipi Heart, PaulHekkert, Ben-Tzion Karsh, JinWoo Kim, Jim Lewis,Clayton Lewis, Gitte Lindgaard, John McCarthy, JoachimMeyer, Rolf Molich, Andrew Monk, Kees Overbeeke, AntOzok, Nayna Patel, Whitney Quesenbery, Ginny Redish,Josephine Reid, Harald Reiterer, Rick Schiﬀerstein, Andrew
Sears, Jonathan Sykes, Hartmut Wandke, Terry Winograd,
Peter Wright, Ping Zhang, Martina Zieﬂe. Last but not least,we would like to thank Ahmet Cakir and Tom Stewart forencouraging us to put together the present special issue.
References
ALBEN, L., 1996, Quality of experience: deﬁning the criteria for eﬀective
interaction design. Interactions ,3,pp. 11 – 15.
ARIELY , D. and C ARMON , Z., 2003, Summary assessment of experiences: the
whole is diﬀerent from the sum of its parts. In Time and decision.
Economic and psychological perspectives on intertemporal choice ,
G. Loewenstein, D. Read and R.F. Baumeister (Eds), pp. 323 – 49
(New York: Russel Sage).
BLYTHE , M., H ASSENZAHL , M. and W RIGHT , P.C. (Eds), 2004, More
Funology [Special Section]. Interactions ,11,36 – 77.
BLYTHE , M., O VERBEEKE , C., M ONK, A.F. and W RIGHT , P.C. (Eds), 2003,
Funology: From Usability to Enjoyment (Dordrecht: Kluwer).
BOVEN,L . V .a n dG ILOVICH , T.D., 2003, To do or to have? That is the question.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,85,pp. 1193 – 202.
CARROLL ,J . M .a n dT HOMAS , J.C., 1988, Fun. SIGCHI Bulletin ,19,p p .2 1–4 .
COCKTON , G. (Ed.), 2002, From doing to being: bringing emotion into
interaction [Special Issue]. Interacting with Computers ,14.
DAVIS, F.D., B AGOZZI , R.P. and W ARSHAW , P.R., 1992, Extrinsic and
Intrinsic Motivation to Use Computers in the Workplace. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology ,22,pp. 1111 – 32.
DESMET , P.M.A. and H EKKERT , P., 2002, The basis of product emotions. In
Pleasure with products: beyond usability , W. Green and P. Jordan (Eds),
pp. 60 – 8 (London: Taylor & Francis).
DESMET , P.M.A., O VERBEEKE , C.J. and T AX, S.J.E.T., 2001, Designing
products with added emotional value: development and application of an
approach for research through design. The Design Journal ,4,pp. 32 – 47.
FORLIZZI , J. and B ATTARBEE , K., 2004, Understanding experience in
interactive systems. In Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS 04): processes, practices, methods, and
techniques (New York: ACM), p. 261.
GAVER , W.W. and M ARTIN , H., 2000, Alternatives. Exploring Information
Appliances through Conceptual Design Proposals. In Proceedings of the
CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors in Computing (New York:
ACM), pp. 209 – 16.
GUTMAN , J., 1997, Means-end chains as goal hierarchies. Psychology and
Marketing ,14,pp. 545 – 60.
HASSENZAHL , M., 2002, The eﬀect of perceived hedonic quality on product
appealingness. International Journal of Human – Computer Interaction ,
13,pp. 479 – 97.
HASSENZAHL , M., 2003, The thing and I: understanding the relationship
between user and product. In Funology: From Usability to Enjoyment ,
M. Blythe, C. Overbeeke, A.F. Monk and P.C. Wright (Eds), pp. 31 – 42(Dordrecht: Kluwer).H
ASSENZAHL , M., 2004a, Emotions can be quite ephemeral. We cannot
design them. Interactions ,11,pp. 46 – 8.
HASSENZAHL , M., 2004b, The interplay of beauty, goodness and usability in
interactive products. Human Computer Interaction ,19,pp. 319 – 49.
HASSENZAHL , M., in press, Hedonic, emotional, and experimental
perspectives on product quality. In Encyclopedia of Human Computer
Interaction , C. Ghaoui (Ed.) (Idea Group).
HASSENZAHL , M., B URMESTER , M. and B EU, A., 2001, Engineering Joy.
IEEE Software ,1and 2,pp. 70 – 6.
HASSENZAHL , M. and S ANDWEG , N., 2003, From Mental Eﬀort to Perceived
Usability: Transforming Experiences into Summary Assessments. InProceedings of the CHI 2004 Conference on Human Factors in Computing.
Extended abstracts (New York: ACM), pp. 1283 – 6.
H
ELANDER , M.G. and T HAM, M.P. (Eds), 2003, Hedonomics – aﬀective
human factors design [Special issue]. Ergonomics ,46.
HOCHSCHILD , A.R., 1990, Das gekaufte Herz. Zur Kommerzialisierung der
Gefu¨hle [The managed heart], (Frankfurt/Main: Campus).
HOLLNAGEL , E., 2003, Is aﬀective computing an oxymoron? International
Journal of Human – Computer Studies ,59,pp. 65 – 70.
HUDLICKA , E., 2003, To feel or not to feel: The role of aﬀect in human –
computer interaction. International Journal of Human – Computer
Studies ,59,pp. 1 – 32.
IGBARIA , M., S CHIFFMAN ,S . J .a n dW IECKOWSKI , T.J., 1994, The respective roles
of perceived usefulness and perceived fun in the acceptance of micro-
computer technology. Behaviour & Information Technology ,13,p p .3 4 9–6 1 .
JORDAN , P., 2000, Designing pleasurable products. An introduction to the new
human factors (London, New York: Taylor & Francis).
KAHNEMAN , D., 1999, Objective happiness. In Well-being: The foundations
of hedonic quality , D. Kahneman, E. Diener and N. Schwarz (Eds),
pp. 3 – 25 (New York: Sage).
KAHNEMAN , D., D IENER , E. and S CHWARZ , N. (Eds), 1999, Well-being: The
foundation of hedonic psychology (New York: Sage).
KIM, J. and M OON, J.Y., 1998, Designing towards emotional usability in
customer interfaces – trustworthiness of cyber-banking system interfaces.Interacting with Computers ,10,pp. 1 – 29.
L
AVIE, T. and T RACTINSKY , N., 2004, Assessing dimensions of perceived
visual aesthetics of web sites. International Journal of Human – Computer
Studies ,60,pp. 269 – 98.
LOEWENSTEIN ,G .a n dL ERNER , J.S., 2003, The role of aﬀect in decision making.
InHandbook of aﬀective science , R.J. Davidson, K.R. Scherer and H.H.
Goldsmith (Eds), pp. 619 – 42 (New York: Oxford University Press).
LOGAN , R.J., A UGAITIS , S. and R ENK, T., 1994, Design of simpliﬁed
television remote controls: a case for behavioral and emotional usability.
InProceedings of the 38th Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting (Santa Monica: HFES), pp. 365 – 9.
MANDIC , M. and K ERNE , A., 2005, Using intimacy, chronology and
zooming to visualize rhythms in email experience. In Proceedings of the
CHI 2005 Conference on Human Factors in Computing. Extendedabstracts (New York: ACM), pp. 1617 – 20.
M
ASLOW , A.H., 1954, Motivation and personality (New York: Harper).
MCDONAGH , D., H EKKERT , P., V ANERP, J. and G YI, D. (Eds), 2003, Design
and Emotion: The Experience of Everyday Things (London: Taylor &
Francis).
MILLARD , N., H OLE, L. and C ROWLE , S., 1999, Smiling through: motivation
at the user interface. In Proceedings of the HCI International’99 ,Volume
2(pp. 824 – 8) (Mahwah, NJ, London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates).
NORMAN , D., 2004a, Emotional design: Why we love (or hate) everyday
things (New York: Basic Books).
NORMAN , D., 2004b, Introduction to this special section on beauty,
goodness, and usability. Human Computer Interaction ,19,pp. 311 – 18.
OVERBEEKE , C.J., D JAJADININGRAT , J.P., H UMMELS , C.C.M. and W ENSVEEN ,
S.A.G., 2002, Beauty in Usability: Forget about ease of use! In Pleasure
with products: Beyond usability , W. Green and P. Jordan (Eds), pp. 9 – 18
(London: Taylor & Francis).96 M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky
PICARD , R., 1997, Aﬀective computing (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
PICARD , R. and K LEIN, J., 2002, Computers that recognise and respond to
user emotion: theoretical and practical implications. Interacting with
Computers ,14,pp. 141 – 69.
POSTREL , V., 2002, The substance of style (New York: Harper Collins).
SELIGMAN , M.E.P. and C SIKSZENTMIHALYI , M., 2000, Positive Psychology:
An Introduction. American Psychologist ,55,pp. 5 – 14.
SHELDON , K.M., E LLIOT , A.J., K IM, Y. and K ASSER , T., 2001, What is
satisfying about satisfying events? Testing 10 candidate psychological
needs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,80,pp. 325 – 39.
SINGH, S.N. and D ALAL, N.P., 1999, Web home pages as advertisements.
Communications of the ACM ,42,pp. 91 – 8.
SUH, E., D IENER , E. and F UJITA , F., 1996, Events and subjective well-being:
Only recent events matter. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,
70,pp. 1091 – 102.
TRACTINSKY , N., in press, Aesthetics in Information Technology: Motiva-
tion and Future Research Directions. In Human – Computer Interaction
in Management Information Systems: Foundations , P. Zhang and
D. Galletta (Eds) (M.E. Sharpe).
TRACTINSKY , N. and Z MIRI, D., in press, Exploring attributes of skins
as potential antecedents of emotion in HCI. In Aesthetic computing ,
P. Fishwick (Ed.) (Cambridge: MIT Press).TRACTINSKY , N., K ATZ, A.S. and I KAR, D., 2000, What is beautiful is usable.
Interacting with Computers ,13,pp. 127 – 45.
VAN DER HOOG, W., S TAPPERS , P.J. and K ELLER , I., 2004, Connecting
mothers and sons: a design using routine aﬀective rituals. Interactions ,
11,pp. 68 – 9.
VETERE , F., G IBBS, M.A., K JELDSKOV , J., H OWARD , S., M UELLER , F., P EDELL ,
S., M ECOLES , K. and B UNYAN , M., 2005, Mediating intimacy: designing
technologies to support strong-tie relationships. Proceedings of the CHI
2005 Conference on Human Factors in Computing (New York: ACM),
pp. 471 – 80.
WHITESIDE , J. and W IXON, D., 1987, The dialectic of usability engineering.
InINTERACT 87 – 2nd IFIP International Conference on Human –
Computer Interaction. September 1 – 4, 1987, Stuttgart, Germany ,
pp. 17 – 20.
WRIGHT , P.C., Mc ARTHY , J. and M EEKISON , L., 2003, Making sense of
experience. In Funology: From Usability to Enjoyment , M. Blythe,
C. Overbeeke, A.F. Monk and P.C. Wright (Eds.), pp. 43 – 53
(Dordrecht: Kluwer).
ZHANG , P. and L I, N., 2004, Love at ﬁrst sight or sustained eﬀect? The role
of perceived aﬀective quality on user’s cognitive reactions to information
technology. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference
on Information Systems (ICIS) , pp. 283 – 95.User experience – a research agenda 97
View publication stats
